25400204<newchar>We postulate that immobilization of tyramine-substituted hyaluronan (THA) into an extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold may be a strategy to promote an anti-inflammatory response to the ECM. Further, we posit that the implantation site could influence the inflammatory response and remodeling of an ECM scaffold. Eight beagles underwent implantation of fascia ECM grafts, treated with either immobilized low molecular weight (57 kDa) THA or water only, in both the shoulder injury and body wall sites. Dogs were euthanized at 12 weeks and fascia grafts harvested en bloc for histology. Grafts implanted at the body wall had significantly higher inflammatory cell infiltrate and vascularity, and significantly lower retardance (collagen density), than grafts at the shoulder, suggestive of a more intense, persistent, and perhaps degradative inflammatory and remodeling response at the body wall than shoulder injury site in the canine model. However, the presence of immobilized low MW THA had no effect on the inflammation response or remodeling of fascia ECM compared to water-treated controls. Importantly, these results suggest that the inflammatory response and remodeling of biomaterial implants depends on the location of implantation and therefore our animal models need to be carefully chosen. Further, the potential anti-inflammatory advantages of hyaluronan (HA) in wound healing do not appear to be realized when presenting it to the host as non-degradable hydrogel even if its capacity for binding HA binding protein is maintained. Further study treating ECM with uncross-linked (free) HA or immobilized low MW THA as a means to deliver free HA or other biomolecules to a surgical repair site is warranted.<newchar>animal model<n-term>biologic graft<n-term>graft remodeling<n-term>polarized light microscopy<n-term>tyramine-substituted hyaluronan<n-term><newabs>26860053<newchar>Tissue-on-chip (TOC) systems aim at replicating complex biological dynamics in vitro with the potential either to improve the understanding of human biology or to develop more accurate therapeutic strategies. To replicate faithfully the intricate interrelationships between cells and their surrounding microenvironment, the three-dimensional (3D) tissue model must possess a responsive extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM remodeling plays a pivotal role in guiding cells and tissues functions and such aspect is somewhat denied during in vitro studies. For this purpose, we fabricated a micro-perfusion bioreactor capable to sustain the viability of 3D engineered tissue models recapitulating the process of the native ECM deposition and assembly. Engineered human dermis micro-tissue precursors (HD-μTP) were used as building blocks to generate a final tissue. HD-μTP were loaded in the perfusion space of the micro-perfusion bioreactor and, under the superimposition of different fluid dynamic regimes and biochemical stimulation, they synthesized new collagen proteins that were, then, assembled in the perfusion space forming a continuum of cells embedded in their own ECM. The micro-perfusion bioreactor was fabricated to allow the on-line monitoring of the oxygen consumption and the assembly of the newly formed collagen network via real time acquisition of the second harmonic generation (SHG) signal. The possibility to detect the collagen reorganization due to both fluid dynamic and biochemical stimulation, let us to define the optimal perfusion configuration in order to obtain a TOC system based on an endogenous and responsive ECM.<newchar><newabs>26068592<newchar>The activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) is a key event in tumor progression, and alternative extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins derived from CAFs induce ECM remodeling and cancer cell invasion. Here we found that miR-200 s, which are generally downregulated in activated CAFs in breast cancer tissues and in normal fibroblasts (NFs) activated by breast cancer cells, are direct mediators of NF reprogramming into CAFs and of ECM remodeling. NFs with downregulated miR-200 s displayed the traits of activated CAFs, including accelerated migration and invasion. Ectopic expression of miR-200 s in CAFs at least partially restored the phenotypes of NFs. CAF activation may be governed by the targets of miR-200 s, Fli-1 and TCF12, which are responsible for cell development and differentiation; Fli-1 and TCF12 were obviously elevated in CAFs. Furthermore, miR-200 s and their targets influenced collagen contraction by CAFs. The upregulation of fibronectin and lysyl oxidase directly by miR-200 or indirectly through Fli-1 or TCF12 contributed to ECM remodeling, triggering the invasion and metastasis of breast cancer cells both in vitro and vivo. Thus, these data provide important and novel insights into breast CAF activation and ECM remodeling, which trigger tumor cell invasion.<newchar><newabs>25415609<newchar>The initiation and progression of heart failure is linked to adverse cardiac remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during disease mainly through the deregulation of myocardial metalloproteinases (MMPs). Relaxin (RLX), a peptide hormone acting as a physiological cardiac effector, is a key regulator of ECM remodeling in reproductive and nonreproductive tissues. Studying primary cultures of mouse cardiac muscle cells and rat H9c2 cardiomyoblasts, we have obtained evidence for a new signaling pathway activated by RLX to induce ECM remodeling that involves the bioactive sphingolipids sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) and ceramide. In both cell populations, recombinant human RLX increased sphingosine kinase activity and S1P formation, whereas sphingomyelin and ceramide content were decreased in [(3)H]serine-labeled cells. According to the literature, RLX promoted MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression/release. Pharmacological inhibition of sphingolipid metabolism and silencing of sphingosine kinase 1, the enzyme responsible for S1P formation, were able to prevent MMP expression/release elicited by the hormone and induce the expression of tissue inhibitor of MMPs. In addition, we found that sphingolipid signaling is required for the regulation of connective tissue growth factor, a member of the CCN 1-3 family of genes that are involved in cell proliferation and differentiation. Finally, the induction of cardiomyoblast maturation induced by RLX was also found to be counteracted by inhibition of S1P formation. In conclusion, these findings provide a novel mechanism by which RLX acts on cardiac ECM remodeling and cardiac cell differentiation and offer interesting therapeutic options to prevent heart fibrosis and to favor myocardial regeneration.<newchar><newabs>27138561<newchar>Oudin and colleagues report a novel and specific function of MENA in mediating directional migration of breast cancer cells toward a fibronectin gradient of increasing concentration. This MENA-mediated haptotactic response depends on the binding of MENA to the α5β1 integrin receptor, adhesion protein signaling, and fibronectin fibrillogenesis. Cancer Discov; 6(5); 474-6. ©2016 AACRSee related article by Oudin et al., p. 516.<newchar><newabs>24726953<newchar>Stem cell antigen-1 (Sca1 or Ly6A/E) is a cell surface marker that is widely expressed in mesenchymal stem cells, including adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs). We hypothesized that the fat depot-specific gene signature of Sca1(high) ASCs may play the major role in defining adipose tissue function and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in a depot-specific manner. Herein we aimed to characterize the unique gene signature and ECM remodeling of Sca1(high) ASCs isolated from subcutaneous (inguinal) and visceral (epididymal) adipose tissues. Sca1(high) ASCs are found in the adventitia and perivascular areas of adipose tissues. Sca1(high) ASCs purified with magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) demonstrate dendrite or round shape with the higher expression of cytokines and chemokines (e.g., Il6, Cxcl1) and the lower expression of a glucose transporter (Glut1). Subcutaneous and visceral fat-derived Sca1(high) ASCs particularly differ in the gene expressions of adhesion and ECM molecules. While the expression of the major membrane-type collagenase (MMP14) is comparable between the groups, the expressions of secreted collagenases (MMP8 and MMP13) are higher in visceral Sca1(high) ASCs than in subcutaneous ASCs. Consistently, slow but focal MMP-dependent collagenolysis was observed with subcutaneous adipose tissue-derived vascular stromal cells, whereas rapid and bulk collagenolysis was observed with visceral adipose tissue-derived cells in MMP-dependent and -independent manners. These results suggest that the fat depot-specific gene signatures of ASCs may contribute to the distinct patterns of ECM remodeling and adipose function in different fat depots.<newchar>Adipocyte<n-term>Adipose-derived stem cell<n-term>Collagen<n-term>ECM<n-term>MMP<n-term>Obesity<n-term>RNA-seq<n-term><newabs>26198096<newchar>In the context of obesity, strong evidences support a distinctive pathological contribution of adipose tissue depending on its anatomical site of accumulation. Therefore, subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) has been lately considered metabolically benign compared to visceral fat (VAT), whose location is associated to the risk of developing cardiovascular disease, insulin resistance, and other associated comorbidities. Under the above situation, the chronic local inflammation that characterizes obese adipose tissue, has acquired a major role on the pathogenesis of obesity. In this work, we have analyzed for the first time human obese VAT and SAT secretomes using an improved quantitative proteomic approach for the study of tissue secretomes, Comparison of Isotope-Labeled Amino acid Incorporation Rates (CILAIR). The use of double isotope-labeling-CILAIR approach to analyze VAT and SAT secretomes allowed the identification of location-specific secreted proteins and its differential secretion. Additionally to the very high percentage of identified proteins previously implicated in obesity or in its comorbidities, this approach was revealed as a useful tool for the study of the obese adipose tissue microenvironment including extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and inflammatory status. The results herein presented reinforce the fact that VAT and SAT depots have distinct features and contribute differentially to metabolic disease.<newchar><newabs>27119645<newchar>The mammary gland extracellular matrix (ECM) is comprised of biopolymers, primarily collagen I, that are created and maintained by stromal fibroblasts. ECM remodeling by fibroblasts results in changes in ECM fiber spacing (pores) that have been shown to play a critical role in the aggressiveness of breast cancer. However, minimally invasive methods to measure the spatial distribution of ECM pore areas within tissues and in vitro 3D culture models are currently lacking. We introduce diffusion-sensitive optical coherence tomography (DS-OCT) to image the nanoscale porosity of ECM by sensing weakly constrained diffusion of gold nanorods (GNRs). DS-OCT combines the principles of low-coherence interferometry and heterodyne dynamic light scattering. By collecting co- and cross-polarized light backscattered from GNRs within tissue culture, the ensemble-averaged translational self-diffusion rate, DT, of GNRs is resolved within ∼3 coherence volumes (10 × 5 μm, x × z). As GNRs are slowed by intermittent collisions with ECM fibers, DT is sensitive to ECM porosity on the size scale of their hydrodynamic diameter (∼46 nm). Here, we validate the utility of DS-OCT using pure collagen I gels and 3D mammary fibroblast cultures seeded in collagen/Matrigel, and associate differences in artificial ECM pore areas with gel concentration and cell seed density. Across all samples, DT was highly correlated with pore area obtained by scanning electron microscopy (R(2) = 0.968). We also demonstrate that DS-OCT can accurately map the spatial heterogeneity of layered samples. Importantly, DS-OCT of 3D mammary fibroblast cultures revealed the impact of fibroblast remodeling, where the spatial heterogeneity of matrix porosity was found to increase with cell density. This provides an unprecedented view into nanoscale changes in artificial ECM porosity over effective pore diameters ranging from ∼43 to 360 nm using a micron-scale optical imaging technique. In combination with the topical deposition of GNRs, the minimally invasive nature of DS-OCT makes this a promising technology for studying tissue remodeling processes.<newchar><newabs>27174688<newchar>In consensus, myocardial infarction (MI) is defined as irreversible cell death secondary to prolonged ischemia in heart. The aim of our study was to evaluate the therapeutic potential of anti-fibrotic human Relaxin-expressing plasmid DNA with hypoxia response element (HRE) 12 copies (HR1) delivered by a dendrimer type PAM-ABP polymer G0 (HR1/G0) after MI on functional, hemodynamic, geometric, and cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in rats. HR1/G0 demonstrated significantly improved LV systolic function, hemodynamic parameters, and geometry on 1 wk and 4 wks after MI in rats, compared with I/R group. The resolution of regional wall motional abnormalities and the increased blood flow of infarct-related coronary artery supported functional improvements of HR1/G0. Furthermore, HR1/G0 polyplex showed favorable post-infarct cardiac ECM remodeling reflected on the favorable cardiac ECM compositions. Overall, this is the first study, which presented an advanced platform for the gene therapy that reverses adverse cardiac remodeling after MI with a HR1 gene delivered by a bioreducible dendrimer polymer in the cardiac ECM.<newchar>Bioreducible polymer<n-term>Cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>Dendrimer<n-term>Infarct-related coronary artery<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term>Post-infarct remodeling<n-term>Relaxin gene therapy<n-term><newabs>26998606<newchar>Chronic liver damage leads to pathological accumulation of ECM proteins (liver fibrosis). Comprehensive characterization of the human ECM molecular composition is essential for gaining insights into the mechanisms of liver disease. To date, studies of ECM remodeling in human liver diseases have been hampered by the unavailability of purified ECM. Here, we developed a decellularization method to purify ECM scaffolds from human liver tissues. Histological and electron microscopy analyses demonstrated that the ECM scaffolds, devoid of plasma and cellular components, preserved the three-dimensional ECM structure and zonal distribution of ECM components. This method has been then applied on 57 liver biopsies of HCV-infected patients at different stages of liver fibrosis according to METAVIR classification. Label-free nLC-MS/MS proteomics and computation biology were performed to analyze the ECM molecular composition in liver fibrosis progression, thus unveiling protein expression signatures specific for the HCV-related liver fibrotic stages. In particular, the ECM molecular composition of liver fibrosis was found to involve dynamic changes in matrix stiffness, flexibility and density related to the dysregulation of predominant collagen, elastic fibers and minor components with both structural and signaling properties. This study contributes to the understanding of the molecular bases underlying ECM remodeling in liver fibrosis and suggests new molecular targets for fibrolytic strategies.<newchar><newabs>25843685<newchar>Previous studies have demonstrated both synergistic and opposing effects of Akt and Mek1/2 in various cell functions and disease states. Furthermore, Akt has been reported to inhibit and activate cRaf/Mek pathway, suggesting that their mutual interaction and cooperation may be cell type, stimuli and/or context specific. While PI3-kinase/Akt and cRaf/Mek pathways have been implicated in the regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, mutual interactions between these two pathways and their specific contributions to the events leading to ECM synthesis and assembly is not clear. We investigated the specific role of Akt1 and Mek1 in ECM synthesis and assembly by NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and how these effects were reconciled to mediate overall ECM remodeling. Our study identified that cooperation between Akt1 and Mek1 is necessary to mediate ECM synthesis. Whereas Akt1 activation resulted in Mek1 activation as evidenced by increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation, Mek1 inhibition using U0126 or DN-Mek1 resulted in enhanced Akt1 phosphorylation. Interestingly, both Akt1 and Mek1 activities were needed for the synthesis and assembly of ECM. The effect of Akt1 and Mek1 on ECM synthesis was reconciled through the activation of p70 S6-kinase via phosphorylation at T421/S424 and S411, respectively. Furthermore, Akt1 and Mek1 cooperated in mediating ECM assembly via activation of integrin β1. Together, we show for the first time that Akt1 and Mek1 pathways cooperate in the regulation of ECM remodeling by the fibroblasts.<newchar>Akt1<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Mek1<n-term>mTOR<n-term>p70 S6-kinase<n-term><newabs>25997875<newchar>Bones are constantly remodeled throughout life to maintain robust structure and function. Dysfunctional remodeling can result in pathological conditions such as osteoporosis (bone loss) or osteosclerosis (bone gain). Bone contains 100 s of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and the ECM of the various bone tissue compartments plays essential roles directing the remodeling of bone through the coupled activity of osteoclasts (which resorb bone) and osteoblasts (which produce new bone). One important role for the ECM is to serve as a scaffold upon which mineral is deposited. This scaffold is primarily type I collagen, but other ECM components are involved in binding of mineral components. In addition to providing a mineral scaffolding role, the ECM components provide structural flexibility for a tissue that would otherwise be overly rigid. Although primarily secreted by osteoblast-lineage cells, the ECM regulates cells of both the osteoblast-lineage (such as progenitors, mature osteoblasts, and osteocytes) and osteoclast-lineage (including precursors and mature osteoclasts), and it also influences the cross-talk that occurs between these two oppositional cells. ECM influences the differentiation process of mesenchymal stem cells to become osteoblasts by both direct cell-ECM interactions as well as by modulating growth factor activity. Similarly, the ECM can influence the development of osteoclasts from undifferentiated macrophage precursor cells, and influence osteoclast function through direct osteoclast cell binding to matrix components. This comprehensive review will focus on how networks of ECM proteins function to regulate osteoclast- and osteoblast-mediated bone remodeling. The clinical significance of these networks on normal bone and as they relate to pathologies of bone mass and geometry will be considered. A better understanding of the dynamic role of ECM networks in regulating tissue function and cell behavior is essential for the development of new treatment approaches for bone loss.<newchar>Bone<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Osteoblast<n-term>Osteoclast<n-term>Osteocyte<n-term><newabs>26565914<newchar>Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a deadly vascular disease with enigmatic molecular origins. We found that vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and stiffening are early and pervasive processes that promote PH. In multiple pulmonary vascular cell types, such ECM stiffening induced the microRNA-130/301 family via activation of the co-transcription factors YAP and TAZ. MicroRNA-130/301 controlled a PPAR?-APOE-LRP8 axis, promoting collagen deposition and LOX-dependent remodeling and further upregulating YAP/TAZ via a mechanoactive feedback loop. In turn, ECM remodeling controlled pulmonary vascular cell crosstalk via such mechanotransduction, modulation of secreted vasoactive effectors, and regulation of associated microRNA pathways. In vivo, pharmacologic inhibition of microRNA-130/301, APOE, or LOX activity ameliorated ECM remodeling and PH. Thus, ECM remodeling, as controlled by the YAP/TAZ-miR-130/301 feedback circuit, is an early PH trigger and offers combinatorial therapeutic targets for this devastating disease.<newchar><newabs>25825543<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation after myocardial infarction (MI) leaves the myocardium structurally weakened and, as a result, susceptible to early infarct zone dyskinesia and left ventricular (LV) remodeling. While various cellular and biomaterial preparations have been transplanted into the infarct zone in hopes of improving post-MI LV remodeling, an allogeneic cardiac muscle-derived ECM extract has yet to be developed and tested in the setting of reperfused MI. We sought to determine the effects of injecting a novel cardiac muscle-derived ECM into the infarct zone on early dyskinesia and LV remodeling in a mouse model of MI. Cardiac muscle ECM was extracted from frozen mouse heart tissue by a protocol that enriches for basement membrane constituents. The extract was injected into the infarct zone immediately after ischemia/reperfusion injury (n = 6). Echocardiography was performed at baseline and at days 2, 7, 14, and 28 post-MI to assess 3D LV volumes and cardiac function, as compared to infarcted controls (n = 9). Early infarct zone dyskinesia was measured on day 2 post-MI using a novel metric, the dyskinesia index. End-systolic volume was significantly reduced in the ECM-treated group compared to controls by day 14. Ejection fraction and stroke volume were also significantly improved in the ECM-treated group. ECM-treated hearts showed a significant (P &lt; 0.005) reduction in dyskinetic motion on day 2. Thus, using high-frequency ultrasound, it was shown that treatment with a cardiac-derived ECM preparation reduced early infarct zone dyskinesia and post-MI LV remodeling in a mouse model of reperfused MI.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>left ventricular remodeling<n-term>myocardial infarction<n-term>small animal imaging<n-term>speckle tracking echocardiography<n-term><newabs>26801303<newchar>Following myocardial infarction (MI), cardiac myofibroblasts remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM), preventing mechanical complications. However, prolonged myofibroblast activity leads to dysregulation of the ECM, maladaptive remodeling, fibrosis, and heart failure (HF). Chronic inflammation is believed to drive persistent myofibroblast activity; however, the mechanisms are unclear. We assessed the influence of peripheral blood monocytes on human cardiac myofibroblast activity in a three-dimensional (3D) ECM microenvironment. Human cardiac myofibroblasts isolated from surgical biopsies of the right atrium and left ventricle were seeded into 3D collagen matrices. Peripheral blood monocytes were isolated from healthy human donors and cocultured with myofibroblasts. Monocytes increased myofibroblast activity measured by collagen gel contraction (baseline: 57.6 ± 5.9% vs. coculture: 65.2 ± 7.1% contraction; P &lt; 0.01) and increased local ECM remodeling quantified by confocal microscopy. Under coculture conditions that allow indirect cellular interaction via paracrine factors but prevent direct cell-cell contact, monocytes had minimal effects on myofibroblast activity (17.9 ± 11.1% vs. 6.4 ± 7.0% increase, respectively; P &lt; 0.01). When cells were cultured under direct contact conditions, multiplex analysis of the coculture media revealed an increase in the paracrine factors TGF-β1 and matrix metalloproteinase 9 compared with baseline (122.9 ± 10.1 pg/ml and 3,496.0 ± 190.4 pg/ml, respectively, vs. 21.5 ± 16.3 pg/ml and 183.3 ± 43.9 pg/ml; P &lt; 0.001). TGF-β blockade abolished the monocyte-induced increase in cardiac myofibroblast activity. These data suggest that direct cell-cell interaction between monocytes and cardiac myofibroblasts stimulates TGF-β-mediated myofibroblast activity and increases remodeling of local matrix. Peripheral blood monocyte interaction with human cardiac myofibroblasts stimulates myofibroblast activity through release of TGF-β1. These data implicate inflammation as a potential driver of cardiac fibrosis.<newchar>cardiac fibrosis<n-term>cardiac myofibroblasts<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>inflammation<n-term>remodeling<n-term><newabs>25043571<newchar>Polypropylene has been used as a surgical mesh material for several decades. This non-degradable synthetic polymer provides mechanical strength, a predictable host response, and its use has resulted in reduced recurrence rates for ventral hernia and pelvic organ prolapse. However, polypropylene and similar synthetic materials are associated with a chronic local tissue inflammatory response and dense fibrous tissue deposition. These outcomes have prompted variations in mesh design to minimize the surface area interface and increase integration with host tissue. In contrast, biologic scaffold materials composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are rapidly degraded in-vivo and are associated with constructive tissue remodeling and minimal fibrosis. The objective of the present study was to assess the effects of an ECM hydrogel coating on the long-term host tissue response to polypropylene mesh in a rodent model of abdominal muscle injury. At 14 days post implantation, the ECM coated polypropylene mesh devices showed a decreased inflammatory response as characterized by the number and distribution of M1 macrophages (CD86+/CD68+) around mesh fibers when compared to the uncoated mesh devices. At 180 days the ECM coated polypropylene showed decreased density of collagen and amount of mature type I collagen deposited between mesh fibers when compared to the uncoated mesh devices. This study confirms and extends previous findings that an ECM coating mitigates the chronic inflammatory response and associated scar tissue deposition characteristic of polypropylene.<newchar>Coated surgical mesh<n-term>ECM (extracellular matrix)<n-term>Foreign body response<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Polypropylene<n-term>Surgical mesh<n-term><newabs>26096733<newchar>The diverse morphologies of animal tissues are underlain by different configurations of adherent cells and extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we elucidate a cross-scale mechanism for tissue assembly and ECM remodeling involving Cadherin 2, the ECM protein Fibronectin, and its receptor Integrin α5. Fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy within the zebrafish paraxial mesoderm mesenchyme reveals a physical association between Integrin α5 on adjacent cell membranes. This Integrin-Integrin complex correlates with conformationally inactive Integrin. Cadherin 2 stabilizes both the Integrin association and inactive Integrin conformation. Thus, Integrin repression within the adherent mesenchymal interior of the tissue biases Fibronectin fibrillogenesis to the tissue surface lacking cell-cell adhesions. Along nascent somite boundaries, Cadherin 2 levels decrease, becoming anti-correlated with levels of Integrin α5. Simultaneously, Integrin α5 clusters and adopts the active conformation and then commences ECM assembly. This cross-scale regulation of Integrin activation organizes a stereotypic pattern of ECM necessary for vertebrate body elongation and segmentation.<newchar><newabs>25708906<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides structural and biochemical signals that regulate cell function. A well-controlled balance between cells and surroundings (i.e., dynamic reciprocity) is crucial for regulating ECM architecture. During cancer progression, epithelial cells undergo genetic alterations which, together with stromal changes including ECM remodeling, disturb the homeostatic dynamics of the epithelium. A parallel organization of stromal ECM fibrils is associated with tumorigenic responses. In an emerging paradigm, continuous and progressive regulation via mechanical forces and aberrant signaling are believed to be responsible for tumor-associated ECM remodeling. In this review we discuss the discrete biomechanical and biochemical mechanisms that underlie these architectural changes and highlight their particular relevance to the regulation of the alignment of ECM in the mesenchymal stroma.<newchar>Rho–ROCK<n-term>biomechanical and biochemical cues<n-term>cell–ECM dynamic reciprocity<n-term>desmoplasia<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>integrins<n-term><newabs>26731549<newchar>For vascular remodeling in hypertension, it is essential that vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) reshape in order to proliferate and migrate. The extracellular matrix (ECM) needs to be degraded to favor VSMC migration. Many proteases, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), contribute to ECM proteolysis and VSMC migration. Bioactive peptides, hemodynamic forces and reactive oxygen-nitrogen species regulate MMP-2 expression and activity. Increased MMP-2 activity contributes to hypertension-induced maladaptive arterial changes and sustained hypertension. New ECM is synthesized to supply VSMCs with bioactive mediators, which stimulate hypertrophy. MMP-2 stimulates the interaction of VSMCs with newly formed ECM, which triggers intracellular signaling via integrins to induce a phenotypic switch and persistent migration. VSMCs switch from a contractile to a synthetic phenotype in order to migrate and contribute to vascular remodeling in hypertension. MMPs also disrupt growth factors bound to ECM, thus contributing to their capacity to regulate VSMC migration. This review sheds light on the proteolytic effects of MMP-2 on ECM and non-ECM substrates in the vasculature and how these effects contribute to VSMC migration in hypertension. The inhibition of MMP activity as a therapeutic target may make it possible to reduce arterial maladaptation caused by hypertension and prevent the resulting fatal cardiovascular events.<newchar><newabs>26699796<newchar>During normal morphogenesis the extracellular matrix (ECM) influences cell motility, proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation. Tissue engineers have attempted to harness the cell signaling potential of ECM to promote the functional reconstruction, if not regeneration, of injured or missing adult tissues that otherwise heal by the formation of scar tissue. ECM bioscaffolds, derived from decellularized tissues, have been used to promote the formation of site appropriate, functional tissues in many clinical applications including skeletal muscle, fibrocartilage, lower urinary tract, and esophageal reconstruction, among others. These scaffolds function by the release or exposure of growth factors and cryptic peptides, modulation of the immune response, and recruitment of progenitor cells. Herein, we describe this process of ECM induced constructive remodeling and examine similarities to normal tissue morphogenesis.<newchar>bioscaffold<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>tissue remodeling<n-term><newabs>26929154<newchar>Intervertebral discs (IVDs) provide stability and flexibility to the spinal column; however, IVDs, and in particular the nucleus pulposus (NP), undergo a degenerative process characterized by changes in the disc extracellular matrix (ECM), decreased cell viability, and reduced synthesis of proteoglycan and type II collagen. Here, we investigated the efficacy and feasibility of stem cell therapy using bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) over-expressing bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) to promote ECM remodeling of degenerated IVDs. Lentivirus-mediated BMP7 over-expression induced differentiation of BMSCs into an NP phenotype, as indicated by expression of the NP markers collagen type II, aggrecan, SOX9 and keratins 8 and 19, increased the content of glycosaminoglycan, and up-regulated β-1,3-glucuronosyl transferase 1, a regulator of chondroitin sulfate synthesis in NP cells. These effects were suppressed by Smad1 silencing, indicating that the effect of BMP7 on ECM remodeling was mediated by the Smad pathway. In vivo analysis in a rabbit model of disc degeneration showed that implantation of BMSCs over-expressing BMP7 promoted cell differentiation and proliferation in the NP, as well as their own survival, and these effects were mediated by the Smad pathway. The results of the present study indicate the beneficial effects of BMP7 on restoring ECM homeostasis in NP cells, and suggest potential strategies for improving cell therapy for the treatment of disc diseases.<newchar>BMP7<n-term>Smad<n-term>intervertebral disc degeneration<n-term>mesenchymal stem cells<n-term>nucleus pulposus<n-term><newabs>26602431<newchar>Uterine spiral arteriole (SA) remodeling in early pregnancy involves a coordinated series of events including decidual immune cell recruitment, vascular cell disruption and loss, and colonization by placental-derived extravillous trophoblast (EVT). During this process, decidual SA are converted from narrow, muscular vessels into dilated channels lacking vasomotor control. We hypothesized that this extensive alteration in SA architecture must require significant reorganization and/or breakdown of the vascular extracellular matrix (ECM). First trimester decidua basalis (30 specimens) was immunostained to identify spiral arterioles undergoing trophoblast-independent and -dependent phases of remodeling. Serial sections were then immunostained for a panel of ECM markers, to examine changes in vascular ECM during the remodeling process. The initial stages of SA remodeling were characterized by loss of laminin, elastin, fibrillin, collagen types III, IV and VI from the basement membrane, vascular media and/or adventitia, and surrounding decidual stromal cells. Loss of ECM correlated with disruption and disorganization of vascular smooth muscle cells, and the majority of changes occurred prior to extensive colonization of the vessel wall by EVT. The final stages of SA remodeling, characterized by the arrival of EVT, were associated with the increased mural deposition of fibronectin and fibrinoid. This study provides the first detailed analysis of the spatial and temporal loss of ECM from the walls of remodeling decidual SA in early pregnancy.<newchar><newabs>26620461<newchar>Degenerative aortic stenosis (AS) is the most common worldwide cause of valve replacement. The aortic valve is a thin, complex, layered connective tissue with compartmentalized extracellular matrix (ECM) produced by specialized cell types, which directs blood flow in one direction through the heart. There is evidence suggesting remodeling of such ECM during aortic stenosis development. Thus, a better characterization of the role of ECM proteins in this disease would increase our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. Aortic valve samples were collected from 18 patients which underwent aortic valve replacement (50% males, mean age of 74 years) and 18 normal control valves were obtained from necropsies (40% males, mean age of 69 years). The proteome of the samples was analyzed by 2D-LC MS/MS iTRAQ methodology. The results showed an altered expression of 13 ECM proteins of which 3 (biglycan, periostin, prolargin) were validated by Western blotting and/or SRM analyses. These findings are substantiated by our previous results demonstrating differential ECM protein expression. The present study has demonstrated a differential ECM protein pattern in individuals with AS, therefore supporting previous evidence of a dynamic ECM remodeling in human aortic valves during AS development.<newchar><newabs>26195589<newchar>Vinculin is filamentous (F)-actin-binding protein enriched in integrin-based adhesions to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Whereas studies in 2-dimensional (2D) tissue culture models have suggested that vinculin negatively regulates cell migration by promoting cytoskeleton-ECM coupling to strengthen and stabilize adhesions, its role in regulating cell migration in more physiologic, 3-dimensional (3D) environments is unclear. To address the role of vinculin in 3D cell migration, we analyzed the morphodynamics, migration, and ECM remodeling of primary murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with cre/loxP-mediated vinculin gene disruption in 3D collagen I cultures. We found that vinculin promoted 3D cell migration by increasing directional persistence. Vinculin was necessary for persistent cell protrusion, cell elongation, and stable cell orientation in 3D collagen, but was dispensable for lamellipodia formation, suggesting that vinculin-mediated cell adhesion to the ECM is needed to convert actin-based cell protrusion into persistent cell shape change and migration. Consistent with this finding, vinculin was necessary for efficient traction force generation in 3D collagen without affecting myosin II activity and promoted 3D collagen fiber alignment and macroscopical gel contraction. Our results suggest that vinculin promotes directionally persistent cell migration and tension-dependent ECM remodeling in complex 3D environments by increasing cell-ECM adhesion and traction force generation.<newchar>3D cell migration<n-term>cell morphodynamics<n-term>integrin<n-term>traction force generation<n-term><newabs>26758423<newchar>Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) are key regulators of new blood vessel formation and widely investigated for their role in tissue regeneration and tumorigenesis. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms through which ASCs regulate angiogenesis are not well understood. Here, it was our goal to test the functional contribution of ASC-mediated extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling on endothelial cell invasion. To isolate the effect of ECM-remodeling, ASCs were embedded within 3-D collagen type I hydrogels and pre-cultured for 7 days; controls were not pre-cultured. A confluent monolayer of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) was seeded on top and its invasion into the underlying hydrogel was analyzed. Without pre-culture, ASCs inhibited vascular sprouting by stabilizing the endothelium. In contrast, 7 day pre-culture of ASCs drastically increased invasion by HUVECs. This effect was largely mediated by proteolytic ECM degradation by ASC-derived matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) rather than vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), as our results indicated that blockade of MMPs, but not VEGF, inhibited endothelial sprouting. Collectively, these data suggest that the angiogenic capability of ASCs is modulated by their proteolytic remodeling of the ECM, opening new avenues for pro- and anti-angiogenic therapies.<newchar><newabs>25142725<newchar>During the fish reproductive cycle, testes undergo morphological changes related to germinal epithelium and remodeling of extracellular matrix components (ECM). ECM is degraded mainly by action of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Due to the natural renewal of ECM in fish testes, we choose Pimelodus maculatus to study remodeling of ECM throughout reproductive cycle, using picrosirius (to identify type I, II, III collagen) and reticulin (type III collagen), and to immunolocalize MT1-MMP (membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase) and MMP-2 in testis cells. Testes were classified in four reproductive phases: regenerating, development, spawning capable and regressing. Picrosirius and reticulin demonstrated a differential distribution of total collagen fibers during the reproductive cycle. Immunohistochemistry showed MT1-MMP only in acidophilic granulocyte cells mainly inside blood vessels, in connective tissue of capsule close to the germinal compartment, and also infiltrated in interstitial connective tissue. MMP-2 was detected in fibroblast and endothelial cells of interstitial and capsule blood vessels, in epithelial cells of capsule, and in acidophilic granulocyte cells at same description for MT1-MMP. The fish testes ECM were remodeled throughout reproductive cycle in according to morphophysiological alterations. During reproductive season (spawning capable), the interstitium increased in total collagen fibers (type I, II, III). After spermiation period (regression and regenerating), the amount of collagen fibers decreased in response to action of MMPs on collagen degradation and other interstitial components (not assessed in this study). MMPs seem to be indispensable components for natural cyclic events of ECM remodeling of fish testes and for guarantee tissue homeostasis throughout reproductive cycle.<newchar><newabs>26451282<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays important roles in maintaining adequate adipose tissue function and in metabolic regulation. Here we have examined the organization of a relatively unexplored adipose tissue ECM component, elastin and its response to diet induced obesity in mice. Additionally, we have explored the regulation and requirement of macrophage metalloelastase, MMP-12, in adipose tissue ECM remodeling in obesity. In visceral fat depots, elastin fibers form a mesh-like net that becomes denser with diet-induced obesity. In contrast, the elastin fibers in subcutaneous adipose depots are more linear in organization, and are tightly associated with adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs). We found that Mmp12 is produced predominantly by ATMs and can be induced with both short- and long-term high fat diet challenge and rapid remodeling induced by lipolysis. This contrasts with Mmp14 and Timp1 which are further induced only after chronic obesity in non-ATM populations. We examined obese transgenic Mmp12 (-/-) mice and found an increase in gene expression of ECM genes with diet-induced obesity, but showed few significant differences in metabolic parameters, elastin matrix density, or in adipose tissue inflammation. Together, these studies reveal the architecture and diet-induced regulation of the elastin matrix and suggest that MMP-12 is not required for elastin matrix remodeling or for the metabolic dysfunction that occurs with obesity.<newchar>adipose tissue fibrosis<n-term>adipose tissue macrophages<n-term>elastin<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>obesity<n-term><newabs>26808525<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a pivotal component adult tissues and of many tissue-specific stem cell niches. It provides structural support and regulates niche signaling during tissue maintenance and regeneration. In many tissues, ECM remodeling depends on the regulation of MMP (matrix metalloproteinase) activity by inhibitory TIMP (tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases) proteins. Here, we report that the only Drosophila timp gene is required for maintaining the normal organization and function of the germline stem cell niche in adult females. timp mutant ovaries show reduced levels of both Drosophila Collagen IV α chains. In addition, tissue stiffness and the cellular organization of the ovarian niche are affected in timp mutants. Finally, loss of timp impairs the ability of the germline stem cell niche to generate new cysts. Our results demonstrating a crucial role for timp in tissue organization and gamete production thus provide a link between the regulation of ECM metabolism and tissue homeostasis.<newchar><newabs>24720751<newchar>Allergic asthma is characterized by chronic airway remodeling, which is associated with the expression of extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) by TGF-β. However, to date there are no reports demonstrating that structural proteins are directly expressed in mast cells. This study aimed to investigate whether ECM proteins are expressed in mast cells activated with antigen/antibody reaction, and whether the resolution effects of irradiation or 8-oxo-dG may contribute to allergic asthma prevention. Bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) were activated with DNP-HSA/anti-DNP IgE antibody (act-BMMCs). C57BL/6 mice were sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) to induce allergic asthma. Mice were treated orally with 8-oxo-dG or exposed to whole body irradiation (using (137)Cs gamma ray at a dose of 0.5 Gy) for three consecutive days 24 h after OVA challenge. Expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, TGF-β signaling molecules and NF-κB/AP-1 was determined in the BMMCs, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells or lung tissues using Western blot, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), respectively. Act-BMMCs increased expression of ECM proteins, TGF-β/TGF-β receptor I, TGF-β signaling molecules and cytokines; and increased both NF-κB and AP-1 activity. In addition, the population of mast cells; expression of mast cell markers, TGF-β signaling molecules, ECM proteins/amounts; OVA-specific serum IgE level; numbers of goblet cells; airway hyperresponsiveness; cytokines/chemokines were increased in BAL cells and lung tissues of OVA-challenged mice. All of the above end points were reduced by irradiation or 8-oxo-dG in vitro and in vivo, respectively. The data suggest that mast cells induce expression of ECM proteins through TGF-β produced in inflammatory cells of OVA mice and that post treatment of irradiation or 8-oxo-dG after OVA-challenge may reduce airway remodeling through down-regulating mast cell re-activation by TGF-β/Smad signals.<newchar><newabs>25157440<newchar>Bone-forming cells originate from distinct embryological layers, mesoderm (axial and appendicular bones) and ectoderm (precursor of neural crest cells, which mainly form facial bones). These cells will develop bones by two principal mechanisms: intramembranous and endochondral ossification. In both cases, condensation of multipotent mesenchymal cells occurs, at the site of the future bone, which differentiate into bone and cartilage-forming cells. During long bone development, an initial cartilaginous template is formed and replaced by bone in a coordinated and refined program involving chondrocyte proliferation and maturation, vascular invasion, recruitment of adult stem cells and intense remodeling of cartilage and bone matrix. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the most important enzymes for cleaving structural components of the extracellular matrix (ECM), as well as other non-ECM molecules in the ECM space, pericellular perimeter and intracellularly. Thus, the bioactive molecules generated act on several biological events, such as development, tissue remodeling and homeostasis. Since the discovery of collagenase in bone cells, more than half of the MMP members have been detected in bone tissues under both physiological and pathological conditions. Pivotal functions of MMPs during development and bone regeneration have been revealed by knockout mouse models, such as chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, osteoclast recruitment and function, bone modeling, coupling of bone resorption and formation (bone remodeling), osteoblast recruitment and survival, angiogenesis, osteocyte viability and function (biomechanical properties); as such alterations in MMP function may alter bone quality. In this review, we look at the principal properties of MMPs and their inhibitors (TIMPs and RECK), provide an up-date on their known functions in bone development and remodeling and discuss their potential application to Bone Bioengineering.<newchar>Bone development<n-term>Bone remodeling<n-term>Extracellular Matrix<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>RECK, Bone Bioengineering<n-term>Tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases<n-term><newabs>25738597<newchar>The embryo-implantation promotes deep changes in the uterus resulting in the formation of a new structure at the maternal-fetal interface, the decidua. Decidualization can also be induced in pseudopregnant rodents resulting in a structure called deciduoma that is morphologically and functionally similar to the decidua. Previous studies from our and other laboratories demonstrate that in rodents, decidualization of the endometrium requires remarkable remodeling of the endometrial extracellular matrix (ECM) that is mainly coordinated by estradiol and progesterone. The influence of the embryo in this process, however, has not yet been investigated. To enlarge the knowledge on this subject, the present study investigates the behavior of a set of ECM molecules, in the absence of paracrine cues originated from the embryo. For that deciduoma was induced in pseudopregnant Swiss mice, and the distribution of collagen types I, III, IV, V and the proteoglycans decorin and biglycan was investigated by immunolabeling from the fifth to the eighth day of pseudopregnancy. It was observed the deposition of collagen types III and IV as well as decorin and biglycan was similar to that previously described by our group in the decidua. However, in the absence of the embryo, some differences occur in the distribution of collagen types I and V, suggesting that beside the major role of ovarian hormones on the endometrial ECM remodeling, molecular signals originated from the conceptus may influence this process.<newchar>Collagen<n-term>decidua<n-term>deciduoma<n-term>endometrium<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>mouse<n-term>proteoglycan<n-term><newabs>23613430<newchar>The regeneration of functional, clinically viable, tissues from acellular ex vivo tissues has been problematic largely due to poor nutrient transport conditions that limit cell migration and integration. Compounding these issues are subcellular pore sizes that necessarily requires extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in order for cells to migrate and regenerate the tissue. The aim of the present work was to create a directed growth environment that allows cells to fully populate an ex vivo-derived vascular scaffold and maintain viability over extended periods. Three different culture conditions using single (one nutrient source) or dual perfusion bioreactor systems (two nutrients sources) were designed to assess the effect of pressure and nutrient gradients under either low (50/30 mmHg) or high (120/80) relative pressure conditions. Human myofibroblasts were seeded to the ablumenal periphery of an ex vivo-derived vascular scaffold using a collagen/hydrogel cell delivery system. After 30 days culture, total cell density was consistent between groups; however, significant variation was noted in cell distribution and construct mechanics as a result of differing perfusion conditions. The most aggressive transport gradient was developed by the single perfusion low-pressure circuits and resulted in a higher proportion of cells migrating across the scaffold toward the vessel lumen (nutrient source). These investigations illustrate the influence of directed nutrient gradients where precisely controlled perfusion conditions significantly affects cell migration, distribution and function, resulting in pronounced effects on construct mechanics during early remodeling events.<newchar><newabs>25410363<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) occupies the space between both neurons and glial cells and thus provides a microenvironment that regulates multiple aspects of neural activities. Because of the vital role of ECM as a natural environment of cells in vivo, there is a growing interest to develop methodology allowing for the detailed structural and functional analyses of ECM. In this chapter, we provide the detailed overview of current microscopic methods used for ECM analysis and also describe general labeling strategies for ECM visualization. Since ECM remodeling involves the proteolytic cleavage of ECM, we will also describe current experimental approaches to image the proteolytic reorganization and/or degradation of ECM. The special focus of this chapter is set to the application of Förster resonance energy transfer-based approaches to monitor intracellular and extracellular matrix functions with high spatiotemporal resolution.<newchar>Autofluorescence lifetime microscopy<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>FRET<n-term>Fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy<n-term>Glycan<n-term>Multiphoton-excitation microscopy<n-term>Neoepitope<n-term>Scanning electron microscopy<n-term>Superresolution microscopy<n-term>Zymography<n-term><newabs>25675397<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a major constituent of the vessel wall. In addition to providing a structural scaffold, the ECM controls numerous cellular functions in both physiologic and pathologic settings. Vascular remodeling occurs after injury and is characterized by endothelial cell activation, inflammatory cell infiltration, phenotypic modulation of smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and augmented deposition of collagen-rich ECM. R1R2, a peptide derived from the bacterial adhesin SFS, with sequence homology to collagen, is known to inhibit collagen type I deposition in vitro by inhibiting the binding of fibronectin to collagen. However, the inhibitory effects of R1R2 during vascular remodeling have not been explored. We periadventitially delivered R1R2 to carotid arteries using pluronic gel in a vascular remodeling mouse model induced by blood flow cessation, and evaluated its effects on intima-media thickening, ECM deposition, SMC activation, and inflammatory cell infiltration. Morphometric analysis demonstrated that R1R2 reduced intima-media thickening compared to the control groups. R1R2 treatment also decreased collagen type I deposition in the vessel wall, and maintained SMC in the contractile phenotype. Interestingly, R1R2 dramatically reduced inflammatory cell infiltration into the vessel by ∼ 78%. This decrease was accompanied by decreased VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 expression. Our in vitro studies revealed that R1R2 attenuated SMC proliferation and migration, and also decreased monocyte adhesion and transendothelial migration through endothelial cells. Together, these data suggest that R1R2 attenuates vascular remodeling responses by decreasing inflammation and by modulating SMC proliferation and migration, and suggest that the R1R2 peptide may have therapeutic potential in treating occlusive vascular diseases.<newchar><newabs>27137489<newchar>Abnormal remodeling of atherosclerotic plaques can lead to rupture, acute myocardial infarction, and death. Enhancement of plaque extracellular matrix (ECM) may improve plaque morphology and stabilize lesions. Here, we demonstrate that chronic administration of LNA-miR-29 into an atherosclerotic mouse model improves indices of plaque morphology. This occurs due to upregulation of miR-29 target genes of the ECM (col1A and col3A) resulting in reduced lesion size, enhanced fibrous cap thickness, and reduced necrotic zones. Sustained LNA-miR-29 treatment did not affect circulating lipids, blood chemistry, or ECM of solid organs including liver, lung, kidney, spleen, or heart. Collectively, these data support the idea that antagonizing miR-29 may promote beneficial plaque remodeling as an independent approach to stabilize vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions.<newchar>LNA<n-term>atherosclerosis<n-term>miR‐29<n-term>plaque<n-term>stability<n-term><newabs>26546746<newchar>Combined muscarinic receptor antagonists and long acting β2-agonists improve symptom control in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) significantly. In clinical studies aclidinium bromide achieved better beneficial effects than other bronchodilators; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. This study assessed the effect of aclidinium bromide combined with formoterol on COPD lung (n=20) and non-COPD lung (n=10) derived epithelial cells stimulated with TGF-β1+carbachol on: (i) the generation of mesenchymal cells in relation to epithelial cells, (II) extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, and (iii) the interaction of ECM on the generation of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. TGF-β1+carbachol enhanced the generation of mesenchymal cells, which was significantly reduced by aclidinium bromide or formoterol. The effect of combined drugs was additive. Inhibition of p38 MAP kinase and Smad by specific inhibitors or aclidinium bromide reduced the generation of mesenchymal cells. In mesenchymal cells, TGF-β1+carbachol induced the deposition of collagen-I and fibronectin which was prevented by both drugs dose-dependently. Formoterol alone reduced collagen-I deposition via cAMP, this however, was overruled by TGF-β1+carbachol and rescued by aclidinium bromide. Inhibition of fibronectin was cAMP independent, but involved p38 MAP kinase and Smad. Seeding epithelial cells on ECM collagen-I and fibronectin induced mesenchymal cell generation, which was reduced by aclidinium bromide and formoterol. Our results suggest that the beneficial effect of aclidinium bromide and formoterol involves cAMP affecting both, the accumulation of mesenchymal cells and ECM remodeling, which may explain the beneficial effect of the drugs on lung function in COPD.<newchar>Aclidinium<n-term>Airway wall remodeling<n-term>COPD<n-term>Epithelial-mesenchymal transition<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Formoterol<n-term><newabs>26687334<newchar>The construction of well-controllable in vitro models of physiological and pathological vascular endothelium remains a fundamental challenge in tissue engineering and drug development. Here, we present an approach for forming a synthetic endothelial extracellular matrix (ECM) that closely resembles that of the native structure by locally depositing basement membrane materials onto type 1 collagen nanofibers only in a region adjacent to the endothelial cell (EC) monolayer. Culturing the EC monolayer on this synthetic endothelial ECM remarkably enhanced its physiological properties, reducing its vascular permeability, and promoting a stabilized, quiescent phenotype. We demonstrated that the EC monolayer on the synthetic endothelial ECM neither creates non-physiological barriers to cell-cell or cell-ECM interactions, nor hinders molecular diffusion of growth factors and other molecules. The synthetic endothelial ECM and vascular endothelium on it may help us enter in a new phase of research in which various models of the biological barrier behavior can be tested experimentally.<newchar><newabs>23700517<newchar>Adipocytes differentiate and function in environments rich in extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The phenotypes of genetically modified mice have aided in recognizing the importance of ECM proteins and their modifiers, e.g., proteinases, in the regulation of obesity and metabolism. Most of the molecular mechanisms through which ECM proteins and modifiers regulate adipogenesis or adipocyte function have not been fully defined. Adipose tissue fibrosis may be a factor that links obesity to diabetes or cardiovascular disease risk in conjunction with tissue inflammation. Defining the molecular mechanisms through which the ECM environment regulates adipogenesis and adipocyte function should provide us with a better understanding of the disease link between obesity and diabetes or cardiovascular diseases.<newchar>ECM<n-term>MMP<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>inflammation<n-term>obesity<n-term><newabs>25316032<newchar>It is widely accepted that fibrosis is frequently observed in the gingiva of smokers. However, the mechanisms by which smoking results in pathological changes in periodontal tissue that lead to fibrosis are not entirely clear. Our former report showed that type I collagen synthesis was promoted by nicotine via CCN family protein 2 in human periodontal tissue cells. Here, we evaluated other aspects of nicotine function from a viewpoint of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Human gingival fibroblasts (n = 4) and periodontal ligament cells (n = 3) were isolated. The cells were treated with nicotine at a variety of concentrations for 12-48 h. Modulators of matrix remodeling were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Cell migration and morphology were also evaluated. As a result, following treatment with 1 μg/ml nicotine, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 and transforming growth factor-β1 production in both cell lysates and supernatants, and matrix metalloproteinases-1 production in cell lysates, were significantly increased (p &lt; 0.05). Compared to controls, cell migration was significantly inhibited (p &lt; 0.005) by nicotine in a time-dependent manner. Electron microscopic analysis revealed the presence of a number of vacuoles in nicotine-treated cells. These results indicate that nicotine not only impairs fibroblast motility, and induces cellular degenerative changes, but also alters ECM-remodeling systems of periodontal cells. Induction of matrix remodeling molecules, combined with type I collagen accumulation, may account for the molecular mechanism of nicotine-induced periodontal fibrosis.<newchar>Fibrosis<n-term>Gingival fibrosis<n-term>Matrix remodeling<n-term>Nicotine<n-term>Smoking<n-term><newabs>25808538<newchar>This study determined the contribution of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling to the protective adaptation of human skeletal muscle known as the repeated-bout effect (RBE). Muscle biopsies were obtained 3 hours, 2 days, and 27 days following an initial bout (B1) of lengthening contractions (LCs) and 2 days following a repeated bout (B2) in 2 separate studies. Biopsies from the nonexercised legs served as controls. In the first study, global transcriptomic analysis indicated widespread changes in ECM structural, deadhesive, and signaling transcripts, 3 hours following LC. To determine if ECM remodeling is involved in the RBE, we conducted a second study by use of a repeated-bout paradigm. TNC immunoreactivity increased 10.8-fold following B1, was attenuated following B2, and positively correlated with LC-induced strength loss (r(2) = 0.45; P = 0.009). Expression of collagen I, III, and IV (COL1A1, COL3A1, COL4A1) transcripts was unchanged early but increased 5.7 ± 2.5-, 3.2 ± 0.9-, and 2.1 ± 0.4-fold (P &lt; 0.05), respectively, 27 days post-B1 and were unaffected by B2. Likewise, TGF-β signaling demonstrated a delayed response following LC. Satellite cell content increased 80% (P &lt; 0.05) 2 days post-B1 (P &lt; 0.05), remained elevated 27 days post-B1, and was unaffected by B2. Collectively, the data suggest sequential ECM remodeling characterized by early deadhesion and delayed reconstructive activity that appear to contribute to the RBE.<newchar>eccentric exercise<n-term>muscle damage<n-term>repeated-bout effect<n-term>satellite cell<n-term><newabs>25017186<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of a versatile and dynamic meshwork of proteoglycans and glycoproteins and plays an important functional role in complex tissues such as the developing retina. ECM forms the milieu surrounding retinal cells, constitutes basement membranes and provides structural as well as mechanical support. In addition, ECM molecules regulate the retinal homeostasis and cellular signaling. This review discusses the current state of ECM remodeling and its function during retinal development. In addition, we illustrate how ECM components control axonal growth and guidance of retinal ganglion cells and focus on ECM modulation during de- and regeneration processes.<newchar>degeneration<n-term>development<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glycoproteins<n-term>phosphacan<n-term>proteoglycans<n-term>retina<n-term>tenascin-C<n-term><newabs>23725758<newchar>The mechanism by which mechanosignal transduction regulates stem cell fate is not well understood. In this issue of Developmental Cell, Tang et al. (2013) demonstrate that catalytic function of the metalloproteinase MT1-MMP controls ECM structure, cell shape, and an integrin/Rho/YAP-TAZ signaling axis to control osteogenic stem cell fate.<newchar><newabs>23849799<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays diverse regulatory roles throughout development. Coordinate interactions between cells within a tissue and the ECM result in the dynamic remodeling of ECM structure. Both chemical signals and physical forces that result from such microenvironmental remodeling regulate cell behavior that sculpts tissue structure. Here, we review recent discoveries illustrating different ways in which ECM remodeling promotes dynamic cell behavior during tissue morphogenesis. We focus first on new insights that identify localized ECM signaling as a regulator of cell migration, shape, and adhesion during branching morphogenesis. We also review mechanisms by which the ECM and basement membrane can both sculpt and stabilize epithelial tissue structure, using as examples Drosophila egg chamber development and cleft formation in epithelial organs. Finally, we end with an overview of the dynamic mechanisms by which the ECM can regulate stem cell differentiation to contribute to proper tissue morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>26008599<newchar>The purpose of this study was to examine the hypothesis that excess maternal glucocorticoids in response to maternal undernutrition programs the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) components potentially by miR-29c. We measured the expression of mRNA (qRT-PCR) and protein (Western blot) for collagen 3A1, collagen 4A5 and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) in offspring carotid arteries from three groups of dams: 50% food-restricted in latter half of gestation [maternal undernutrition (MUN)], MUN dams who received metyrapone (MET) (500 mg/ml ) in drinking water from day 10 of gestation to term, and control dams fed an ad libitum diet. The expression of miR-29c was significantly decreased at 3 weeks, 3 months and 9 months in MUN carotid arteries, and these decreases in expression were partially blocked by treatment of dams with MET. The expression pattern of ECM genes that are targets of miR-29c correlated with miR-29c expression. Expression of mRNA was increased for elastin (ELN) and MMP2 mRNA in 3-week MUN carotids; in 9-month carotids there were also significant increases in expression of Col3A1 and Col4A5. These changes in mRNA expression of ECM genes at 3 weeks and 9 months were blocked by MET treatment. Similarly, the expression of ELN and MMP2 proteins at 3 weeks were increased in MUN carotids, and by 9 months there were also increases in expression of Col3A1 and Col4A5, which were blocked by MET in MUN carotids. Overall, the results demonstrate a close correlation between expression of miR-29c and the ECM proteins that are its targets thus supporting our central hypothesis.<newchar>carotid remodeling<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fetal programming<n-term>miR-29c<n-term><newabs>26917739<newchar>An important barrier for axon regeneration and recovery after traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) is attributed to the scar that is formed at the lesion site. Here, we investigated the effect of mouse mast cell protease (mMCP) 6, a mast cell (MC)-specific tryptase, on scarring and functional recovery after a spinal cord hemisection injury. Functional recovery was significantly impaired in both MC-deficient and mMCP6-knockout (mMCP6(-/-)) mice after SCI compared with wild-type control mice. This decrease in locomotor performance was associated with an increased lesion size and excessive scarring at the injury site. Axon growth-inhibitory chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans and the extracellular matrix components fibronectin, laminin, and collagen IV were significantly up-regulated in MC-deficient and mMCP6(-/-) mice, with an increase in scar volume between 23 and 32%. A degradation assay revealed that mMCP6 directly cleaves fibronectin and collagen IV in vitro In addition, gene expression levels of the scar components fibronectin, aggrecan, and collagen IV were increased up to 6.8-fold in mMCP6(-/-) mice in the subacute phase after injury. These data indicate that endogenous mMCP6 has scar-suppressing properties after SCI via indirect cleavage of axon growth-inhibitory scar components and alteration of the gene expression profile of these factors.-Vangansewinkel, T., Geurts, N., Quanten, K., Nelissen, S., Lemmens, S., Geboes, L., Dooley, D., Vidal, P. M., Pejler, G., Hendrix, S. Mast cells promote scar remodeling and functional recovery after spinal cord injury via mouse mast cell protease 6.<newchar>CNS trauma<n-term>ECM remodeling<n-term>gene expression<n-term>improved outcome<n-term>mMCP6<n-term><newabs>26141607<newchar>Systemic sclerosis (SSc, scleroderma) is an often-fatal disease characterized by connective tissue fibrosis of skin and internal organs. In scleroderma, there is an excessive production and accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components resulting from an increase in collagen synthesis and matrix stability. Understanding how this how excessive ECM is produced and remodeled may represent a novel therapeutic approach. In this review, the transcription factors and collagen-modifying enzymes underlying collagen overexpression and enhancing stability in SSc are discussed. Moreover, the role of matrix stiffness in promoting fibrosis via a feed-forward mechanism is discussed. Indeed, the emerging evidence is that enhanced ECM remodeling resulting in increased ECM stiffness may be sufficient in itself to sustain persistence fibrosis in SSc.<newchar><newabs>25662495<newchar>Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) has been shown to have anti-fibrotic, pro-angiogenic, and cardioprotective effects; however, it is highly unstable and expensive to manufacture, hindering its clinical translation. Recently, a HGF fragment (HGF-f), an alternative c-MET agonist, was engineered to possess increased stability and recombinant expression yields. In this study, we assessed the potential of HGF-f, delivered in an extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived hydrogel, as a potential treatment for myocardial infarction (MI). HGF-f protected cardiomyocytes from serum-starvation and induced down-regulation of fibrotic markers in whole cardiac cell isolate compared to the untreated control. The ECM hydrogel prolonged release of HGF-f compared to collagen gels, and in vivo delivery of HGF-f from ECM hydrogels mitigated negative left ventricular (LV) remodeling, improved fractional area change (FAC), and increased arteriole density in a rat myocardial infarction model. These results indicate that HGF-f may be a viable alternative to using recombinant HGF, and that an ECM hydrogel can be employed to increase growth factor retention and efficacy.<newchar>Decellularization<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Growth factor<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term><newabs>24348274<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) supports vascular integrity during embryonic development. Proteolytic degradation of ECM components is required for angiogenesis, but excessive ECM proteolysis causes blood vessel fragility and hemorrhage. Little is understood about how ECM proteolysis is transcriptionally regulated during embryonic vascular development. We now show that the NuRD ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complex promotes vascular integrity by preventing excessive ECM proteolysis in vivo. Mice lacking endothelial CHD4--a catalytic subunit of NuRD complexes--died at midgestation from vascular rupture. ECM components surrounding rupture-prone vessels in Chd4 mutants were significantly downregulated prior to embryonic lethality. Using qPCR arrays, we found two critical mediators of ECM stability misregulated in mutant endothelial cells: the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR or Plaur) was upregulated, and thrombospondin-1 (Thbs1) was downregulated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that CHD4-containing NuRD complexes directly bound the promoters of these genes in endothelial cells. uPAR and THBS1 respectively promote and inhibit activation of the potent ECM protease plasmin, and we detected increased plasmin activity around rupture-prone vessels in Chd4 mutants. We rescued ECM components and vascular rupture in Chd4 mutants by genetically reducing urokinase (uPA or Plau), which cooperates with uPAR to activate plasmin. Our findings provide a novel mechanism by which a chromatin-remodeling enzyme regulates ECM stability to maintain vascular integrity during embryonic development.<newchar><newabs>24519465<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) fills the space between cells, supports tissue organization, and transduces mechanical, chemical, and biological signals to regulate homeostasis of the left ventricle (LV). Following myocardial infarction (MI), a multitude of ECM proteins are synthesized to replace myocyte loss and form a reparative scar. Activated fibroblasts (myofibroblasts) are the primary source of ECM proteins, thus playing a key role in cardiac repair. A balanced turnover of ECM through regulation of synthesis by myofibroblasts and degradation by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is critical for proper scar formation. In this review, we summarize the current literature on the roles of myofibroblasts, MMPs, and ECM proteins in MI-induced LV remodeling. In addition, we discuss future research directions that are needed to further elucidate the molecular mechanisms of ECM actions to optimize cardiac repair.<newchar><newabs>25770908<newchar>Repair following injury involves a range of processes - such as re-epithelialization, scar formation, angiogenesis, inflammation, and more - that function, often together, to restore tissue architecture. MMPs carry out diverse roles in all of these activities. In this article, we discuss how specific MMPs act on ECM during two critical repair processes: re-epithelialization and resolution of scar tissue. For wound closure, we discuss how two MMPs - MMP1 in human epidermis and MMP7 in mucosal epithelia - facilitate re-epithelialization by cleaving different ECM or ECM-associated proteins to affect similar integrin:matrix adhesion. In scars and fibrotic tissues, we discuss that a variety of MMPs carry out a diverse range of activities that can either promote or limit ECM deposition. However, few of these MMP-driven activities have been demonstrated to be due a direct action on ECM.<newchar>Cell adhesion<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Re-epithelialization<n-term>Scar<n-term><newabs>25732052<newchar>Tendinopathy is a common musculoskeletal injury whose treatment is limited by ineffective therapeutic interventions. Previously we have shown that tendons ineffectively repair early sub-rupture fatigue damage. In contrast, physiological exercise has been shown to promote remodeling of healthy tendons but its utility as a therapeutic to promote repair of fatigue damaged tendons remains unknown. Therefore, the objective of this study was to assess the utility of exercise initiated 1 and 14 days after onset of fatigue damage to promote structural repair in fatigue damaged tendons. We hypothesized that exercise initiated 14 days after fatigue loading would promote remodeling as indicated by a decrease in area of collagen matrix damage, increased procollagen I and decorin, while decreasing proteins indicative of tendinopathy. Rats engaged in 6-week exercise for 30 min/day or 60 min/day starting 1 or 14 days after fatigue loading. Initiating exercise 1-day after onset of fatigue injury led to exacerbation of matrix damage, particularly at the tendon insertion. Initiating exercise 14 days after onset of fatigue injury led to remodeling of damaged regions in the midsubstance and collagen synthesis at the insertion. Physiological exercise applied after the initial biological response to injury has dampened can potentially promote remodeling of damaged tendons.<newchar>ECM<n-term>exercise<n-term>fatigue<n-term>tendinopathy<n-term>tendon damage<n-term><newabs>25659756<newchar>Previously we reported that matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) plays an important role in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in diabetic kidney. Induction of NMDA-R and dysregulation of connexins (Cxs) were also observed. We concluded that this was due to decreased H2S production by downregulation of CBS and CSE enzymes. However, the potential role of H2S to mitigate ECM dysregulation and renal dysfunction was not clearly understood. The present study was undertaken to determine whether H2S supplementation reduces MMP-9-induced ECM remodeling and dysfunction in diabetic kidney. Wild type (C57BL/6J), diabetic (Akita, C57BL/6J-Ins2(Akita)), MMP-9 knockout (MMP-9(-/-), M9KO) and double KO of Akita/MMP-9(-/-) (DKO) mice were treated without or with 0.005 g/l of NaHS (as a source of H2S) in drinking water for 30 days. Decreased tissue production and plasma content of H2S in Akita mice were ameliorated with H2S supplementation. Dysregulated expression of MMP-9, CBS, CSE, NMDA-R1 and Cxs-40, -43 was also normalized in Akita mice treated with H2S. In addition, increased renovascular resistive index (RI), ECM deposition, plasma creatinine, and diminished renal vascular density and cortical blood flow in Akita mice were normalized with H2S treatment. We conclude that diminished H2S production in renal tissue and plasma levels in diabetes mediates adverse renal remodeling, and H2S therapy improves renal function through MMP-9- and NMDA-R1-mediated pathway.<newchar>Collagen–elastin<n-term>Connexins<n-term>Diabetes<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Hydrogen sulfide<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>Nephropathy<n-term>Renal microvasculature<n-term><newabs>24335144<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) derived from decellularized tissues effectively reprogram key stages of the mammalian response to injury, altering the wound microenvironment from one that promotes scar tissue formation to one that stimulates constructive and functional tissue remodeling. In contrast, engineered scaffolds, composed of purified ECM components such as collagen, lack the complex ultrastructure and composition of intact ECM and may promote wound healing but lack factors that facilitate constructive and functional tissue remodeling. The objective of the present study was to test the hypothesis that addition of NELL1, a signaling protein that controls cell growth and differentiation, enhances the constructive tissue remodeling of a purified collagen scaffold. An abdominal wall defect model in the rat of 1.5-cm(2) partial thickness was used to compare the constructive remodeling of a bovine type I collagen scaffold to a biologic scaffold derived from small intestinal submucosa (SIS)-ECM with and without augmentation with 17 μg NELL1 protein. Samples were evaluated histologically at 14 days and 4 months. The contractile response of the defect site was also evaluated at 4 months. Addition of NELL1 protein improved the constructive remodeling of collagen scaffolds but not SIS-ECM scaffolds. Results showed an increase in the contractile force of the remodeled skeletal muscle and a fast:slow muscle composition similar to native tissue in the collagen-treated group. The already robust remodeling response to SIS-ECM was not enhanced by NELL1 at the dose tested. These findings suggest that NELL1 protein does contribute to the enhanced constructive remodeling of skeletal muscle.<newchar><newabs>26582054<newchar>A hallmark of heart failure (HF) is adverse extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, which is regulated by the collagen cross-linking enzyme, lysyl oxidase (LOX). In this study, we evaluate the efficacy of LOX inhibition to prevent adverse left ventricular (LV) remodeling and dysfunction using an experimental model of HF. Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to surgically induced volume overload (VO) by creation of aortocaval fistula (ACF). A LOX inhibitor, beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN; 100 mg/kg/day), was administered to rats with ACF or sham surgery at eight weeks postsurgery. Echocardiography was used to assess progressive alterations in cardiac ventricular structure and function. Left ventricular (LV) catheterization was used to assess alterations in contractility, stiffness, LV pressure and volume, and other indices of cardiac function. The LV ECM alterations were assessed by: (a) histological staining of collagen, (b) protein expression of collagen types I and III, (c) hydroxyproline assay, and (d) cross-linking assay. LOX inhibition attenuated VO-induced increases in cardiac stress, and attenuated increases in interstitial myocardial collagen, total collagen, and protein levels of collagens I and III. Both echocardiography and catheterization measurements indicated improved cardiac function post-VO in BAPN treated rats vs. untreated. Inhibition of LOX attenuated VO-induced decreases in LV stiffness and cardiac function. Overall, our data indicate that LOX inhibition was cardioprotective in the volume overloaded heart.<newchar>Fibrosis<n-term>cardiac function<n-term>cardioprotection<n-term>collagen<n-term>heart failure<n-term><newabs>26348727<newchar>Endobronchial ultrasonography (EBUS) revealed differences in the thickness of the layer representing subepithelial tissues (L2) between human asthmatics and controls, but whether this measurement correlates with airway smooth muscle (ASM) remodeling in asthma is unknown. In this study, we sought to determine the ability of EBUS to predict histological ASM remodeling in normal and equine asthmatic airways. We studied 109 isolated bronchi from the lungs of 13 horses. They underwent EBUS examination using a 30 MHz radial probe before being processed for histology. ASM remodeling parameters were evaluated in EBUS images (L2 thickness, L2 area, L2 area/internal perimeter [Pi] and L2 area/Pi2) and histological cuts (ASM area/Pi2), and compared. EBUS was then performed ex vivo on the lungs of 4 horses with heaves, an asthma-like condition of horses, and 7 controls to determine whether central bronchial remodeling could be detected with this technique. An optimized approach was developed based on data variability within airways, subjects, and groups, and then validated in 7 horses (3 controls, 4 with heaves) that underwent EBUS in vivo. L2 area was significantly associated to ASM area in isolated lungs (p&lt;0.0001), in the absence of significant bias related to the airway size. Bronchial size significantly affected EBUS ASM-related parameters, except for L2 area/Pi2. L2 area/Pi2 was increased in the airways of asthmatic horses compared to controls, both ex vivo and in vivo (p&lt;0.05). Bronchial histology confirmed our findings (AASM/Pi2 was increased in asthmatic horses compared to controls, p&lt;0.05). In both horses with heaves and controls, L2 was composed of ASM for the outer 75% of its thickness and by ECM for the remaining inner 25%. In conclusion, EBUS reliably allows assessment of asthma-associated ASM remodeling of central airways in a non-invasive way.<newchar><newabs>25910275<newchar>Adiponectin, circulating levels of which are reduced in obesity and diabetes, mediates cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in response to pressure overload (PO). Here, we performed a detailed temporal analysis of progressive cardiac ECM remodelling in adiponectin knockout (AdKO) and wild-type (WT) mice at 3 days and 1, 2, 3 and 4 weeks following the induction of mild PO via minimally invasive transverse aortic banding. We first observed that myocardial adiponectin gene expression was reduced after 4 weeks of PO, whereas increased adiponectin levels were detected in cardiac homogenates at this time despite decreased circulating levels of adiponectin. Scanning electron microscopy and Masson's trichrome staining showed collagen accumulation increased in response to 2 and 4 weeks of PO in WT mice, while fibrosis in AdKO mice was notably absent after 2 weeks but highly apparent after 4 weeks of PO. Time and intensity of fibroblast appearance after PO was not significantly different between AdKO and WT animals. Gene array analysis indicated that MMP2, TIMP2, collagen 1α1 and collagen 1α3 were induced after 2 weeks of PO in WT but not AdKO mice. After 4 weeks MMP8 was induced in both genotypes, MMP9 only in WT mice and MMP1α only in AdKO mice. Direct stimulation of primary cardiac fibroblasts with adiponectin induced a transient increase in total collagen detected by picrosirius red staining and collagen III levels synthesis, as well as enhanced MMP2 activity detected via gelatin zymography. Adiponectin also enhanced fibroblast migration and attenuated angiotensin-II induced differentiation to a myofibroblast phenotype. In conclusion, these data indicate that increased myocardial bioavailability of adiponectin mediates ECM remodeling following PO and that adiponectin deficiency delays these effects.<newchar><newabs>26725948<newchar>The application of cryotherapy is widely used in sports medicine today. Cooling could minimize secondary hypoxic injury through the reduction of cellular metabolism and injury area. Conflicting results have also suggested cryotherapy could delay and impair the regeneration process. There are no definitive findings about the effects of cryotherapy on the process of muscle regeneration. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effects of a clinical-like cryotherapy on inflammation, regeneration and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling on the Tibialis anterior (TA) muscle of rats 3, 7 and 14 days post-injury. It was observed that the intermittent application of cryotherapy (three 30-minute sessions, every 2 h) in the first 48 h post-injury decreased inflammatory processes (mRNA levels of TNF-α, NF-κB, TGF-β and MMP-9 and macrophage percentage). Cryotherapy did not alter regeneration markers such as injury area, desmin and Myod expression. Despite regulating Collagen I and III and their growth factors, cryotherapy did not alter collagen deposition. In summary, clinical-like cryotherapy reduces the inflammatory process through the decrease of macrophage infiltration and the accumulation of the inflammatory key markers without influencing muscle injury area and ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26721597<newchar>Despite current optimal therapeutic regimens, approximately one in four patients diagnosed with myocardial infarction (MI) will go on to develop congestive heart failure, and heart failure has a high five-year mortality rate of 50%. Elucidating mechanisms whereby heart failure develops post-MI, therefore, is highly needed. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key enzymes involved in post-MI remodeling of the left ventricle (LV). While MMPs process cytokine and extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates to regulate the inflammatory and fibrotic components of the wound healing response to MI, MMPs also serve as upstream signaling initiators with direct actions on cell signaling cascades. In this review, we summarize the current literature regarding MMP roles in post-MI LV remodeling. We also identify the current knowledge gaps and provide templates for experiments to fill these gaps. A more complete understanding of MMP roles, particularly with regards to upstream signaling roles, may provide new strategies to limit adverse LV remodeling.<newchar>Extracellular matridomics<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>MMP<n-term>Proteomics<n-term>Signaling<n-term>Systems biology<n-term><newabs>26084217<newchar>Extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN), known for its ability to induce matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression, was proposed to play a role in the adverse cardiac extracellular matrix remodeling. After observing an age-associated increase in cardiac EMMPRIN expression in both mice and rats, the role and mechanism of action of EMMPRIN was investigated in the myocardial age-associated changes using 3, 12 and 24 month old EMMPRIN knock-out (KO) vs. wild-type (WT) mice, by cardiac echocardiography, Western blots, immunohistochemistry, ELISA and histology. Adilated cardiomyopathy characterized by a decreased ejection fraction and an enlargement of left ventricular chamber (LV) associated with LV hypertrophy, occurred in KO mice as soon as 12 month old. The increase in interstitial collagen deposition during aging in WT mice could not be detected in KO mice. This may be related to the reduced activation (48% reduction; P &lt; 0.05) and signaling (smad2/3 nuclear translocation) of TGF-β in the 12 month old KO mice which paralleled with a greater reduction in the TGF-β known activating enzymes such as MT1-MMP and MMP-1 (33% and 37% reduction respectively, between 3 and 12 month old in KO mice; P &lt; 0.05) as well as uPA. These findings demonstrate that EMMPRIN gene silencing is associated with an aberrant extracellular matrix remodeling, characterized by the absence of a detected age-associated fibrosis and consequently to dilated cardiopathy, indicating that a fine regulation of EMMPRIN is essential for the coordinated ECM remodeling during aging.<newchar><newabs>25326575<newchar>Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) is a clinical syndrome that is characterized by high pulmonary vascular resistance due to changes in lung vascular growth, structure, and tone. PPHN has been primarily considered as a disease of the small pulmonary arteries (PA), but proximal vascular stiffness has been shown to be an important predictor of morbidity and mortality in other diseases associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH). The objective of this study is to characterize main PA (MPA) stiffness in experimental PPHN and to determine the relationship of altered biomechanics of the MPA with changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) content and orientation of collagen and elastin fibers. MPAs were isolated from control and PPHN fetal sheep model and were tested by planar biaxial testing to measure stiffness in circumferential and axial vessel orientations. Test specimens were fixed for histological assessments of the vascular wall ECM constituents collagen and elastin. MPAs from PPHN sheep had increased mechanical stiffness (P &lt; 0.05) and altered ECM remodeling compared with control MPA. A constitutive mathematical model and histology demonstrated that PPHN vessels have a smaller contribution of elastin and a greater role for collagen fiber engagement compared with the control arteries. We conclude that exposure to chronic hemodynamic stress in late-gestation fetal sheep increases proximal PA stiffness and alters ECM remodeling. We speculate that proximal PA stiffness further contributes to increased right ventricular impedance in experimental PPHN, which contributes to abnormal transition of the pulmonary circulation at birth.<newchar>biomechanics<n-term>collagen<n-term>elastin<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>lung development<n-term>persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn<n-term><newabs>26371175<newchar>Recent studies have demonstrated remodeling of aortic and mitral valves leaflets under the volume loading and cardiac expansion of pregnancy. Those valves' leaflets enlarge with altered collagen fiber architecture, content, and cross-linking and biphasic changes (decreases, then increases) in extensibility during gestation. This study extends our analyses to right-sided valves, with additional compositional measurements for all valves. Valve leaflets were harvested from nonpregnant heifers and pregnant cows. Leaflet structure was characterized by leaflet dimensions, and ECM composition was determined using standard biochemical assays. Histological studies assessed changes in cellular and ECM components. Leaflet mechanical properties were assessed using equibiaxial mechanical testing. Collagen thermal stability and cross-linking were assessed using denaturation and hydrothermal isometric tension tests. Pulmonary and tricuspid leaflet areas increased during pregnancy by 35 and 55%, respectively. Leaflet thickness increased by 20% only in the pulmonary valve and largely in the fibrosa (30% thickening). Collagen crimp length was reduced in both the tricuspid (61%) and pulmonary (42%) valves, with loss of crimped area in the pulmonary valve. Thermomechanics showed decreased collagen thermal stability with surprisingly maintained cross-link maturity. The pulmonary leaflet exhibited the biphasic change in extensibility seen in left side valves, whereas the tricuspid leaflet mechanics remained largely unchanged throughout pregnancy. The tricuspid valve exhibits a remodeling response during pregnancy that is significantly diminished from the other three valves. All valves of the heart remodel in pregnancy in a manner distinct from cardiac pathology, with much similarity valve to valve, but with interesting valve-specific responses in the aortic and tricuspid valves.<newchar>bovine<n-term>collagen<n-term>elastin<n-term>mechanical properties<n-term>valvular interstitial cells<n-term><newabs>25106431<newchar>Remodeling in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has at least two dimensions: small airway wall thickening and destruction of alveolar walls. Recently we showed comparable alterations of the extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds collagen, hyaluoran, and elastin in alveolar and small airway walls of COPD patients. The aim of this study was to characterize and assess similarities in alveolar and small airway wall matrix remodeling in chronic COPD models. From this comparative characterization of matrix remodeling we derived and elaborated underlying mechanisms to the matrix changes reported in COPD. Lung tissue sections of chronic models for COPD, either induced by exposure to cigarette smoke, chronic intratracheal lipopolysaccharide instillation, or local tumor necrosis factor (TNF) expression [surfactant protein C (SPC)-TNFα mice], were stained for elastin, collagen, and hyaluronan. Furthermore TNF-α matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, -9, and -12 mRNA expression was analyzed using qPCR and localized using immunohistochemistry. Both collagen and hyaluronan were increased in alveolar and small airway walls of all three models. Interestingly, elastin contents were differentially affected, with a decrease in both alveolar and airway walls in SPC-TNFα mice. Furthermore TNF-α and MMP-2 and -9 mRNA and protein levels were found to be increased in alveolar walls and around airway walls only in SPC-TNFα mice. We show that only SPC-TNFα mice show changes in elastin remodeling that are comparable to what has been observed in COPD patients. This reveals that the SPC-TNFα model is a suitable model to study processes underlying matrix remodeling and in particular elastin breakdown as seen in COPD. Furthermore we indicate a possible role for MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the breakdown of elastin in airways and alveoli of SPC-TNFα mice.<newchar>chronic obstructive pulmonary disease<n-term>elastin<n-term>mice model<n-term>tumor necrosis factor-α<n-term><newabs>22750370<newchar>Both of bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 4 (Bmp2 and Bmp4) are two closely related members of the transforming growth factor beta superfamily and play diverse roles in normal and pathological processes. However, detail understandings of mechanisms through which Bmp2 and Bmp4 exert their effects remain elusive due to their functional compensations each other. To study roles of Bmp2/Bmp4 in osteoblast differentiation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, calvarial osteoblasts from Bmp2/4 conditional mice with Cre recombinase recognition site (loxP) were isolated and transfected with simian virus 40 large T antigen to generate immortalized BMP2C/C4C/C (iBMP2 C/C/4C/C) osteoblast lines. The BMP2/4 genes in the iBMP2 C/C/4C/C cells were double knocked out by Ad-Cre recombinase infection. Differentiation and mineralization of iBMP2C/C/4C/C knock-out (iBmp2C/C/4C/C KO) cells were detected by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and alizarin (ALZ) red S staining analyses. ECM remodeling was also observed in fluorescent microscope. Cell differentiation was dramatically decreased in the iBMP2C/C/4C/C KO cells compared to that of the iBMP2C/C/4C/C osteoblasts. Mineralization was also reduced in these KO cells by ALZ staining. Furthermore, Bmp2/4 double knock-out cells have major defects in remodeling the ECM as reflected by changes in collagen type I processing. Here we for the first time demonstrate the establishment of iBmp2C/C/4C/C KO osteoblasts. Cell differentiation and mineralization in the iBmp2C/C/4C/C KO cells were decreased. Furthermore, ECM processing in these KO cells was impaired. This indicates that BMP2/4 play important roles in osteoblast differentiation and ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26101996<newchar>Extracellular matrix plays a dynamic role during the process of wound healing, embryogenesis and tissue regeneration. Caudal fin regeneration in zebrafish is an excellent model to study tissue and skeletal regeneration. We have analyzed the expression pattern of some of the well characterized ECM proteins during the process of caudal fin regeneration in zebrafish. Our results show that a transitional matrix analogous to the one formed during newt skeletal and heart muscle regeneration is synthesized during fin regeneration. Here we demonstrate that a provisional matrix rich in hyaluronic acid, tenascin C, and fibronectin is synthesized following amputation. Additionally, we observed that the link protein Hapln1a dependent ECM, consisting of Hapln1a, hyaluronan and proteoglycan aggrecan, is upregulated during fin regeneration. Laminin, the protein characteristic of differentiated tissues, showed only modest change in the expression pattern. Our findings on zebrafish fin regeneration implicates that changes in the extracellular milieu represent an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that proceeds during tissue regeneration, yet with distinct players depending on the type of tissue that is involved.<newchar>Aggrecan<n-term>ECM<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Hapln1a<n-term>Hyaluronic acid<n-term>Regeneration<n-term>Tenascin C<n-term>Transitional matrix<n-term>Zebrafish<n-term><newabs>25288002<newchar>The mechanisms of anthracycline-dependent cardiotoxicity have been studied widely, with the suggested principal mechanism of anthracycline damage being the generation of reactive oxygen species by iron-anthracycline complexes, leading to lipid peroxidation and membrane damage. An increasing number of researchers studying cardiovascular events associated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy are addressing cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The heart is an efficient muscular pump, with the cardiomyocytes and intramural coronary vasculature of the heart tethered in an ECM consisting of a network of fibrillar, structural proteins, mostly collagens. Increasing evidence suggests that the ECM plays a complex and diverse role in the processes initiated by anthracycline-class drugs that lead to cardiac damage. This review discusses adverse myocardial remodeling induced by anthracyclines and focuses on their mechanisms of action.<newchar><newabs>26188246<newchar>Proper remodeling of the endocardial cushions into thin fibrous valves is essential for gestational progression and long-term function. This process involves dynamic interactions between resident cells and their local environment, much of which is not understood. In this study, we show that deficiency of the cell-cell adhesion protein cadherin-11 (Cad-11) results in significant embryonic and perinatal lethality primarily due to valve related cardiac dysfunction. While endocardial to mesenchymal transformation is not abrogated, mesenchymal cells do not homogeneously cellularize the cushions. These cushions remain thickened with disorganized ECM, resulting in pronounced aortic valve insufficiency. Mice that survive to adulthood maintain thickened and stenotic semilunar valves, but interestingly do not develop calcification. Cad-11 (-/-) aortic valve leaflets contained reduced Sox9 activity, β1 integrin expression, and RhoA-GTP activity, suggesting that remodeling defects are due to improper migration and/or cellular contraction. Cad-11 deletion or siRNA knockdown reduced migration, eliminated collective migration, and impaired 3D matrix compaction by aortic valve interstitial cells (VIC). Cad-11 depleted cells in culture contained few filopodia, stress fibers, or contact inhibited locomotion. Transfection of Cad-11 depleted cells with constitutively active RhoA restored cell phenotypes. Together, these results identify cadherin-11 mediated adhesive signaling for proper remodeling of the embryonic semilunar valves.<newchar>Aortic valve insufficiency<n-term>Calcification<n-term>Compaction<n-term>Congenital heart defect<n-term>Filopodia<n-term>Hyperplasia<n-term>RhoA<n-term>Stress fiber<n-term><newabs>26206378<newchar>Cancer cells possess unique characteristics such as invasiveness, the ability to undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and an inherent stemness. Cell morphology is altered during these processes and this is highly dependent on actin cytoskeleton remodeling. Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is, therefore, important for determination of cell fate. Mutations within the TP53 (tumor suppressor p53) gene leading to loss or gain of function (GOF) of the protein are often observed in aggressive cancer cells. Here, we highlight the roles of p53 and its GOF mutants in cancer cell invasion from the perspective of the actin cytoskeleton; in particular its reorganization and regulation by cell adhesion molecules such as integrins and cadherins. We emphasize the multiple functions of p53 in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton remodeling in response to the extracellular microenvironment, and oncogene activation. Such an approach provides a new perspective in the consideration of novel targets for anti-cancer therapy.<newchar>Contractile forces<n-term>ECM degradation<n-term>Focal adhesion proteins<n-term>Mechanotransduction<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>Rho GTPases<n-term>p53<n-term>p63<n-term><newabs>26639755<newchar>Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) plays a pivotal role in the remodeling of connective tissues. Emerging data indicate the distinctive role of PDGF receptor-α (PDGFRα) in this process. In the present study, the Pdgfra gene was systemically inactivated in adult mouse (α-KO mouse), and the role of PDGFRα was examined in the subcutaneously implanted sponge matrices. PDGFRα expressed in the fibroblasts of Pdgfra-preserving control mice (Flox mice), was significantly reduced in the sponges in α-KO mice. Neovascularized areas were largely suppressed in the α-KO mice than in the Flox mice, whereas the other parameters related to the blood vessels and endothelial cells were similar. The deposition of collagen and fibronectin and the expression of collagen 1a1 and 3a1 genes were significantly reduced in α-KO mice. There was a significantly decrease in the number and dividing fibroblasts in the α-KO mice, and those of macrophages were similar between the two genotypes. Hepatocyte growth factor (Hgf) gene expression was suppressed in Pdgfra-inactivated fibroblasts and connective tissue. The findings implicate the role of PDGFRα-dependent ECM and HGF production in fibroblasts that promotes the remodeling of connective tissue and suggest that PDGFRα may be a relevant target to regulate connective tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23388150<newchar>An appropriate method to bind extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and growth factors using advanced protein engineering techniques has the potential to enhance cell proliferation and differentiation for tissue regeneration and repair. In this study we developed a method to co-immobilize non-covalently an ECM protein to three different types of growth factors: basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF) and single-chain vascular endothelial growth factor (scVEGF121) through a coiled-coil structure formed by helixA/helixB in order to promote angiogenesis. The designed ECM was established by fusing two repeats of elastin-derived unit (APGVGV)(12), cell-adhesive sequence (RGD), laminin-derived IKVAV sequence and collagen-binding domain (CBD) to obtain CBDEREI2. HelixA was fused to each growth factor and helixB to the engineered ECM. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were cultured on engineered ECM and growth factors connected through the coiled-coil formation between helixA and helixB. Cell proliferation and capillary tube-like formation were monitored. Moreover, the differentiated cells with high expression of Ang-2 suggested the ECM remodeling. Our approach of non-covalent coupling method should provide a protein-release control system as a new contribution in biomaterial for tissue engineering field.<newchar><newabs>26227679<newchar>An ideal tissue engineering scaffold should not only promote, but take an active role in, constructive remodeling and formation of site appropriate tissue. Extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived proteins provide unmatched cellular recognition, and therefore influence cellular response towards predicted remodeling behaviors. Materials built with only these proteins, however, can degrade rapidly or begin too weak to substitute for compliant, matrix-dense tissues. The focus of this Progress Report is on biohybrid materials that incorporate polymer components with ECM-derived proteins, to produce a substrate with desired mechanical and degradation properties, as well as actively guide tissue remodeling. Materials are described through four fabrication methods: 1) polymer and ECM-protein fibers woven together, 2) polymer and ECM proteins combined in a bilayer, 3) cell-built ECM on polymer scaffold, and 4) ECM proteins and polymers combined in a single hydrogel. Scaffolds from each fabrication method can achieve characteristics suitable for different types of tissue. In vivo testing has shown progressive remodeling in injury models, and suggests ECM-based biohybrid materials promote a prohealing immune response over single component alternatives. The prohealing immune response is associated with lasting success and long term host maintenance of the implant.<newchar>biohybrid materials<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>scaffold remodeling<n-term>scaffolds<n-term><newabs>26780438<newchar>Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular matrix (ECM)-modifying enzyme that has been involved in cardiovascular remodeling. We explore the impact of LOX inhibition in ECM alterations induced by obesity in the cardiovascular system. LOX is overexpressed in the heart and aorta from rats fed a high-fat diet (HFD). β-Aminopropionitrile (BAPN), an inhibitor of LOX activity, significantly attenuated the increase in body weight and cardiac hypertrophy observed in HFD rats. No significant differences were found in cardiac function or blood pressure among any group. However, HFD rats showed cardiac and vascular fibrosis and enhanced levels of superoxide anion (O2(-)), collagen I and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) in heart and aorta and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in aorta, effects that were attenuated by LOX inhibition. Interestingly, BAPN also prevented the increase in circulating leptin levels detected in HFD fed animals. Leptin increased protein levels of collagen I, TGF-β and CTGF, Akt phosphorylation and O2(-) production in both cardiac myofibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells in culture, while LOX inhibition ameliorated these alterations. LOX knockdown also attenuated leptin-induced collagen I production in cardiovascular cells. Our findings indicate that LOX inhibition attenuates the fibrosis and the oxidative stress induced by a HFD on the cardiovascular system. The reduction of leptin levels by BAPN in vivo and the ability of this compound to inhibit leptin-induced profibrotic mediators and ROS production in cardiac and vascular cells suggest that interactions between leptin and LOX regulate downstream events responsible for myocardial and vascular fibrosis in obesity.<newchar>Fibrosis<n-term>Leptin<n-term>Lysyl oxidase<n-term>Obesity<n-term><newabs>23845395<newchar>Over-expression of WISP1 has been described in multi-organ fibrosis and tissue remodeling. Moreover, it has recently been found that polymorphism of WISP1 gene is related with the change of lung function in asthmatic subjects. Therefore, we hypothesized that WISP1 might be closely linked to occurrence and development of asthmatic airway remodeling. Aim of this study was to examine the roles of WISP1 in an asthmatic model with airway remodeling and assess the specific effects of WISP1 on human lung fibroblast in vitro. Animal models were developed by challenged with ovalbumin. The levels of WISP1 expression in animal models were assessed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. To examine the specific effects of WISP1 on airway remodeling, WISP1 was depleted by neutralizing α-WISP1 antibodies in vivo. Moreover, human lung fibroblast (HFL-1) was challenged with WISP1 in the presence and absence of SH-5 in vitro. Our study showed that OVA exposure increased the levels of WISP1 expression in a rat asthma model. WISP1 depletion could partially inhibit OVA-induced airway remodeling. In vitro, WISP1-treated HFL-1 cells presented abnormal proliferation and over-expression of Col1a1 and Fn1. However, WISP1-induced collagen release from HFL-1 cells could be attenuated by pretreatment with an Akt inhibitor. Moreover, the levels of p-Akt and p-GSK-3β in WISP1-treated HFL-1 cells were also significantly elevated. In summary, WISP1 might initiate and perpetuate the pathological remodeling of asthma by inducing fibroblast proliferation and ECM deposition. The specific effects of WISP1 were likely due to activation of pulmonary Akt/GSK-3β signaling.<newchar>Airway remodeling<n-term>Akt signaling pathway<n-term>Asthma<n-term>GSK-3β<n-term>Lung fibroblast<n-term>WISP1<n-term><newabs>26748698<newchar>During pancreas development, epithelial buds undergo branching morphogenesis to form an exocrine and endocrine gland. Proper morphogenesis is necessary for correct lineage allocation of pancreatic progenitors; however, the cellular events underlying pancreas morphogenesis are unknown. Here, we employed time-lapse microscopy and fluorescent labeling of cells to analyze cell behaviors associated with pancreas morphogenesis. We observed that outer bud cells adjacent to the basement membrane are pleomorphic and rearrange frequently; additionally, they largely remain in the outer cell compartment even after mitosis. These cell behaviors and pancreas branching depend on cell contacts with the basement membrane, which induce actomyosin cytoskeleton remodeling via integrin-mediated activation of FAK/Src signaling. We show that integrin signaling reduces E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion in outer cells and provide genetic evidence that this regulation is necessary for initiation of branching. Our study suggests that regulation of cell motility and adhesion by local niche cues initiates pancreas branching morphogenesis.<newchar>E-cadherin<n-term>FAK<n-term>Src<n-term>adhesion<n-term>branching<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>integrin<n-term>morphogenesis<n-term>pancreas<n-term>progenitor<n-term>time-lapse imaging<n-term><newabs>25763091<newchar>The present study was designed to determine whether EA stimulates remodeling of extracellular matrix by inhibiting apoptosis in degenerated disc. 40 rabbits were randomly assigned to one of the four groups. Animal model was established by a loading device. Magnetic resonance imaging and Pfirrmann's classification were obtained to evaluate both the model and the EA treatment on disc degeneration. The ultrastructure of discs was observed by TEM. Apoptosis involvement was determined with TUNEL staining and western blot for the protein expression of Bax and Bcl-2. The results indicated that EA intervention decreased the MRI grades. TEM analysis showed an apparent remodeling and rearrangement of disc ECM after EA intervention for 28 days. The number of TUNEL-positive cells in the EA group was significantly lower than that in the compression group. The protein expression demonstrated an antiapoptosis effect mediated by EA. Increased expression of Bcl-2 proteins and reduced Bax protein expression were detected after 28 days treatment. It was concluded that antiapoptosis pathway probably participates in the mechanism of EA stimulating the remodeling of ECM in disc degeneration.<newchar><newabs>24859129<newchar>Organs are characterized by a specific shape that is often remodeled during development. The dynamics of organ shape is in particular evident during the formation of the Drosophila nervous system. During embryonic stages the central nervous system compacts, whereas selective growth occurs during larval stages. The nervous system is covered by a layer of surface glial cells that form the blood brain barrier and a thick extracellular matrix called neural lamella. The size of the neural lamella is dynamically adjusted to the growing nervous system and we show here that perineurial glial cells secrete proteases to remodel this matrix. Moreover, an imbalance in proteolytic activity results in an abnormal shape of the nervous system. To identify further components controlling nervous system shape we performed an RNAi based screen and identified the gene nolo, which encodes an ADAMTS-like protein. We generated loss of function alleles and demonstrate a requirement in glial cells. Mutant nolo larvae, however, do not show an abnormal nervous system shape. The only predicted off-target of the nolo(dsRNA) is Oatp30B, which encodes an organic anion transporting protein characterized by an extracellular protease inhibitor domain. Loss of function mutants were generated and double mutant analyses demonstrate a genetic interaction between nolo and Oatp30B which prevented the generation of maternal zygotic mutant larvae.<newchar>ADAMTS-like<n-term>Drosophila<n-term>ECM remodeling<n-term>Glial cells<n-term>Oatp30B<n-term>nolo<n-term><newabs>24140801<newchar>Recent studies have placed an increasing amount of emphasis on the cardiovascular system and understanding how the heart and its vasculature can be regenerated following pathological stresses, such as hypertension and myocardial infarction. The remodeling process involves the permanent cellular constituents of the heart including myocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, pericytes, smooth muscle cells and stem cells. It also includes transient cell populations, such as immune cells (e.g. lymphocytes, mast cells and macrophages) and circulating stem cells. Following injury, there are dramatic shifts in the various cardiac cell populations that can affect cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions and cardiac function. Cardiac fibroblasts are a key component in normal heart function, as well as during the remodeling process through dynamic cell-cell interactions and synthesis and degradation of the extracellular matrix. Fibroblasts dynamically interact with the various cardiac cell populations through mechanical, chemical (autocrine and/or paracrine) and electrophysiological means to alter gene and protein expression, cellular processes and ultimately cardiac function. Better understanding these cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions and their biological consequences should provide novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of heart disease. In this review we discuss the nature of these interactions and the importance of these interactions in maintaining normal heart function, as well as their role in the cardiac remodeling process. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled &quot;Myocyte-Fibroblast Signalling in Myocardium.&quot;<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts<n-term>Cardiac remodeling<n-term>Cell–cell interactions<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Myocytes<n-term><newabs>22244696<newchar>Transplantation of human neural stem cells (hNSCs) is emerging as a viable treatment for stroke related brain injury. However, intraparenchymal grafts do not regenerate lost tissue, but rather integrate into the host parenchyma without significantly affecting the lesion cavity. Providing a structural support for the delivered cells appears important for cell based therapeutic approaches. The non-invasive monitoring of therapeutic methods would provide valuable information regarding therapeutic strategies but remains a challenge. Labeling transplanted cells with metal-based (1)H-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents affects the visualization of the lesion cavity. Herein, we demonstrate that a (19)F-MRI contrast agent can adequately monitor the distribution of transplanted cells, whilst allowing an evaluation of the lesion cavity and the formation of new tissue on (1)H-MRI scans. Twenty percent of cells labeled with the (19)F agent were of host origin, potentially reflecting the re-uptake of label from dead transplanted cells. Both T(2)- and diffusion-weighted MRI scans indicated that transplantation of hNSCs suspended in a gel form of a xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) bioscaffold resulted in uniformly distributed cells throughout the lesion cavity. However, diffusion MRI indicated that the injected materials did not yet establish diffusion barriers (i.e. cellular network, fiber tracts) normally found within striatal tissue. The ECM bioscaffold therefore provides an important support to hNSCs for the creation of de novo tissue and multi-nuclei MRI represents an adept method for the visualization of some aspects of this process. However, significant developments of both the transplantation paradigm, as well as regenerative imaging, are required to successfully create new tissue in the lesion cavity and to monitor this process non-invasively.<newchar><newabs>24256566<newchar>The pathogenesis of multiple myeloma (MM) is regarded as a multistep process, in which an asymptomatic stage of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) precedes virtually all cases of MM. Molecular events characteristic for the transition from MGUS to MM are still poorly defined. We hypothesized that fibroblast-like cells in the tumor microenvironment are critically involved in the pathogenesis of MM. Therefore, we performed a comparative proteome profiling study, analyzing primary human fibroblast-like cells isolated from the bone marrow of MM, of MGUS, as well as of non-neoplastic control patients. Thereby, a group of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, ECM receptors, and ECM-modulating enzymes turned out to be progressively up-regulated in MGUS and MM. These proteins include laminin α4, lysyl-hydroxylase 2, prolyl 4-hydroxylase 1, nidogen-2, integrin α5β5, c-type mannose receptor 2, PAI-1, basigin, and MMP-2, in addition to PDGF-receptor β and the growth factor periostin, which are likewise involved in ECM activities. Our results indicate that ECM remodeling by fibroblast-like cells may take place already at the level of MGUS and may become even more pronounced in MM. The identified proteins which indicate the stepwise progression from MGUS to MM may offer new tools for therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>25875748<newchar>It is well accepted that angiotensin II (Ang II) induces altered vascular stiffness through responses including both structural and material remodeling. Concurrent with remodeling is the induction of the enzyme lysyl oxidase (LOX) through which ECM proteins are cross-linked. The study objective was to determine the effect of LOX mediated cross-linking on vascular mechanical properties. Three-month old mice were chronically treated with Ang II with or without the LOX blocker, β -aminopropionitrile (BAPN), for 14 days. Pulse wave velocity (PWV) from Doppler measurements of the aortic flow wave was used to quantify in vivo vascular stiffness in terms of an effective Young's modulus. The increase in effective Young's modulus with Ang II administration was abolished with the addition of BAPN, suggesting that the material properties are a major controlling element in vascular stiffness. BAPN inhibited the Ang II induced collagen cross-link formation by 2-fold and PWV by 44% (P&lt;0.05). Consistent with this observation, morphometric analysis showed that BAPN did not affect the Ang II mediated increase in medial thickness but significantly reduced the adventitial thickness. Since the hypertensive state contributes to the measured in vivo PWV stiffness, we removed the Ang II infusion pumps on Day 14 and achieved normal arterial blood pressures. With pump removal we observed a decrease of the PWV in the Ang II group to 25% above that of the control values (P=0.002), with a complete return to control values in the Ang II plus BAPN group. In conclusion, we have shown that the increase in vascular stiffness with 14 day Ang II administration results from a combination of hypertension-induced wall strain, adventitial wall thickening and Ang II mediated LOX ECM cross-linking, which is a major material source of vascular stiffening, and that the increased PWV was significantly inhibited with co-administration of BAPN.<newchar><newabs>24427313<newchar>Scirrhous gastric carcinoma (SGC) has the worst prognosis of all gastric cancers, owing to its rapid expansion by invasion and frequent peritoneal dissemination. Due to the increased proliferation of stromal fibroblasts (SFs) that occurs within SGC lesions and the peritoneal metastatic sites, SFs have been proposed to support the progression of this disease. However, the biological and molecular basis and the pathological role of the intercellular interaction between SGC cells and SFs remain largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of SFs in the invasion of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by SGC cells. When SGC cells were cocultured with SFs derived from SGC tissue on three-dimensional (3D) Matrigel, they were attracted together to form large cellular aggregates that invaded within the Matrigel. Time-lapse imaging revealed that this process was associated with extensive contraction and remodeling of the ECM. Immunofluorescence and biochemical analysis showed that SGC cells stimulate phosphorylation of myosin light chain and actomyosin-mediated mechanical remodeling of the ECM by SFs. By utilizing this assay system for inhibitor library screening, we have identified several inhibitors that potently suppress the cooperation between SGC cells and SFs to form the invasive structures. Among them, a Src inhibitor dasatinib impaired the interaction between SGC cells and SFs both in vitro and in vivo and effectively blocked peritoneal dissemination of SGC cells. These results indicate that SFs mediate mechanical remodeling of the ECM by SGC cells, thereby promoting invasion and peritoneal dissemination of SGC.<newchar><newabs>23806385<newchar>Nebivolol and metoprolol are β1-adrenergic receptor blockers with different properties. We hypothesized that nebivolol, but not metoprolol, could attenuate prooxidant and profibrotic mechanisms of hypertension and therefore protect against the vascular remodeling associated with hypertension. Hypertension was induced in male Wistar rats by clipping the left renal artery. Six weeks after surgery, hypertensive and sham rats were treated with nebivolol (10 mg kg(-1) day(-1)) or metoprolol (20 mg kg(-1) day(-1)) for 4 weeks. Systolic blood pressure was monitored weekly. Morphologic changes in the aortic wall were studied in hematoxylin/eosin and picrosirius red sections. Aortic NAD(P)H activity and superoxide production were evaluated by luminescence and dihydroethidium, respectively, and TBARS levels were measured in plasma. Aortic nitrotyrosine staining was evaluated to assess peroxynitrite formation. TGF-β levels and p-ERK 1/2 expression were determined by immunofluorescence and Western blotting, respectively. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and expression were determined by in situ zymography, gel zymography, Western blotting, and immunofluorescence, and TIMP-1 was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Both β1-receptor antagonists exerted very similar antihypertensive effects. However, while metoprolol had no significant effects, nebivolol significantly attenuated vascular remodeling and collagen deposition associated with hypertension. Moreover, nebivolol, but not metoprolol, attenuated hypertension-induced increases in aortic NAD(P)H oxidase activity, superoxide production, TBARS concentrations, nitrotyrosine levels, TGF-β upregulation, and MMP-2 and -9 expression/activity. No effects on p-ERK 1/2 and TIMP-1 expression were found. These results show for the first time that nebivolol, but not metoprolol, attenuates prooxidant and profibrotic mechanisms involving TGF-β and MMP-2 and MMP-9, which promote vascular remodeling in hypertension.<newchar>2 kidney, one clip<n-term>2K1C<n-term>DHE<n-term>ECM<n-term>ERK 1/2<n-term>MMP<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Metoprolol<n-term>Nebivolol<n-term>Oxidative stress<n-term>Renovascular hypertension<n-term>SBP<n-term>TBARS<n-term>TGF<n-term>Vascular remodeling<n-term>dihydroethidium<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular regulated kinase 1/2<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>systolic blood pressure<n-term>thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances<n-term>transforming grown factor<n-term><newabs>25418164<newchar>Contractile forces exerted on the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) lead to the alignment and stretching of constituent fibers within the vicinity of cells. As a consequence, the matrix reorganizes to form thick bundles of aligned fibers that enable force transmission over distances larger than the size of the cells. Contractile force-mediated remodeling of ECM fibers has bearing on a number of physiologic and pathophysiologic phenomena. In this work, we present a computational model to capture cell-mediated remodeling within fibrous matrices using finite element-based discrete fiber network simulations. The model is shown to accurately capture collagen alignment, heterogeneous deformations, and long-range force transmission observed experimentally. The zone of mechanical influence surrounding a single contractile cell and the interaction between two cells are predicted from the strain-induced alignment of fibers. Through parametric studies, the effect of cell contractility and cell shape anisotropy on matrix remodeling and force transmission are quantified and summarized in a phase diagram. For highly contractile and elongated cells, we find a sensing distance that is ten times the cell size, in agreement with experimental observations.<newchar><newabs>23423382<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) composition, organization, and compliance provide both architectural and chemical cues that modulate tissue structure and function. ECM produced by stromal fibroblasts plays a key role in breast cancer invasion and metastasis, which are also stimulated by intratumoral hypoxia. Here, we demonstrate that hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a critical regulator of ECM remodeling by fibroblasts under hypoxic conditions. HIF-1 activates expression of genes encoding collagen prolyl (P4HA1 and P4HA2) and lysyl (PLOD2) hydroxylases. P4HA1 and P4HA2 are required for collagen deposition, whereas PLOD2 is required for ECM stiffening and collagen fiber alignment. Together P4HA1, P4HA2, and PLOD2 mediate remodeling of ECM composition, alignment, and mechanical properties in response to hypoxia. HIF-1-dependent ECM remodeling by hypoxic fibroblasts induces changes in breast cancer cell morphology, adhesion, and motility that promote invasion and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>24959581<newchar>Cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) is composed primarily of the network type II collagen (COLII) and an interlocking mesh of fibrous proteins and proteoglycans (PGs), hyaluronic acid (HA), and chondroitin sulfate (CS). Articular cartilage ECM plays a crucial role in regulating chondrocyte metabolism and functions, such as organized cytoskeleton through integrin-mediated signaling via cell-matrix interaction. Cell signaling through integrins regulates several chondrocyte functions, including differentiation, metabolism, matrix remodeling, responses to mechanical stimulation, and cell survival. The major signaling pathways that regulate chondrogenesis have been identified as wnt signal, nitric oxide (NO) signal, protein kinase C (PKC), and retinoic acid (RA) signal. Integrins are a large family of molecules that are central regulators in multicellular biology. They orchestrate cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesive interactions from embryonic development to mature tissue function. In this review, we emphasize the signaling molecule effect and the biomechanics effect of cartilage ECM on chondrogenesis.<newchar><newabs>27257368<newchar>The aim of this study was to set up an ex vivo model for renal interstitial fibrosis in order to investigate the extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover profile in the fibrotic kidney. We induced kidney fibrosis in fourteen 12-week-old male Sprague Dawley rats by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) surgery of the right ureter. The left kidney (contralateral) was used as internal control. Six rats were sham operated and used as the control group. Rats were terminated two weeks after the surgery; the kidneys were excised and precision-cut kidney slices (PCKSs) were cultured for five days in serum-free medium. Markers of collagen type I formation (P1NP), collagen type I and III degradation (C1M and C3M), and α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) were measured in the PCKS supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. P1NP, C1M, C3M, and α-SMA were increased up to 2- to 13-fold in supernatants of tissue slices from the UUO-ligated kidneys compared with the contralateral kidneys (P &lt; 0.001) and with the kidneys of sham-operated animals (P &lt; 0.0001). The markers could also reflect the level of fibrosis in different animals. The UUO PCKS ex vivo model provides a valuable translational tool for investigating the extracellular matrix remodeling associated with renal interstitial fibrosis.<newchar>PCKS<n-term>UUO<n-term>ex vivo<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>kidney fibrosis<n-term><newabs>24803315<newchar>Organ fibrosis has been viewed as a major medical problem that leads to progressive dysfunction of the organ and eventually the death of patients. Stress-related hormone norepinephrine (NE) has been reported to exert fibrogenic actions in the injured organ. Nix plays a critical role in pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling and heart failure through mediating cardiomyocyte apoptosis. However, cardiac remodeling also includes fibrosis. Whether Nix is involved in stress-induced fibrosis remains unclear. The present study was designed to determine the role of Nix in NE-induced NIH/3T3 fibroblasts. The results showed that Nix was upregulated and closely associated with cell proliferation, collagen and fibronectin expression in NIH/3T3 fibroblasts following NE treatment. Overexpression of Nix promoted collagen and fibronectin expression, whereas the suppression of Nix resulted in a strong reduction in collagen and fibronectin expression. Moreover, the increases in collagen and fibronectin expression induced by NE were successively increased when Nix was overexpressed and reduced when Nix was inhibited. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the PKC activation is responsible for the upregulation of Nix induced by NE. Inhibition of Nix expression with α-adrenoceptor antagonist, β-adrenoceptor antagonist or PKC inhibitor attenuated NE-induced collagen and fibronectin expression. Our data revealed that Nix is a novel mediator of NE-induced fibrosis. Thus, it would provide a new insight into the development of effective preventative measures and therapies of tissue fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>23572561<newchar>Transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) is a pleiotropic factor involved in the regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and remodeling. In search for novel genes mediating the action of TGF-β1 on vascular ECM, we identified the member of the lysyl oxidase family of matrix-remodeling enzymes, lysyl oxidase-like 4 (LOXL4), as a direct target of TGF-β1 in aortic endothelial cells, and we dissected the molecular mechanism of its induction. Deletion mapping and mutagenesis analysis of the LOXL4 promoter demonstrated the absolute requirement of a distal enhancer containing an activator protein 1 (AP-1) site and a Smad binding element for TGF-β1 to induce LOXL4 expression. Functional cooperation between Smad proteins and the AP-1 complex composed of JunB/Fra2 accounted for the action of TGF-β1, which involved the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent phosphorylation of Fra2. We furthermore provide evidence that LOXL4 was extracellularly secreted and significantly contributed to ECM deposition and assembly. These results suggest that TGF-β1-dependent expression of LOXL4 plays a role in vascular ECM homeostasis, contributing to vascular processes associated with ECM remodeling and fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>25312736<newchar>The ability of a human artery to pass through 150 million liters of blood sustaining 2 billion pulsations of blood pressure with minor deterioration depends on unique construction of the arterial wall. Viscoelastic properties of this construction enable to re-seal the occuring damages apparently without direct immediate participance of the constituent cells. Collagen structures are considered to be the elements that determine the mechanoelastic properties of the wall in parallel with elastin responsible for elasticity and resilience. Collagen scaffold architecture is the function-dependent dynamic arrangement of a dozen different collagen types composing three distinct interacting forms inside the extracellular matrix of the wall. Tightly packed molecules of collagen types I, III, V provide high tensile strength along collagen fibrils but toughness of the collagen scaffold as a whole depends on molecular bonds between distinct fibrils. Apart of other macromolecules in the extracellular matrix (ECM), collagen-specific interlinks involve microfilaments of collagen type VI, meshwork-organized collagen type VIII, and FACIT collagen type XIV. Basement membrane collagen types IV, XV, XVIII and cell-associated collagen XIII enable transmission of mechanical signals between cells and whole artery matrix. Collagen scaffold undergoes continuous remodeling by decomposition promoted with MMPs and reconstitution from newly produced collagen molecules. Pulsatile stress-strain load modulates both collagen synthesis and MMP-dependent collagen degradation. In this way the ECM structure becomes adoptive to mechanical challenges. The mechanoelastic properties of the arterial wall are changed in atherosclerosis concomitantly with collagen turnover both type-specific and dependent on the structure. Improving the feedback could be another approach to restore sufficient blood circulation.<newchar><newabs>24739303<newchar>Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is prevalent in patients with hypertension and is an independent risk factor for aortic pathologies. HHcy is known to cause an imbalance between matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), leading to the accumulation of collagen in the aorta and resulting in stiffness and development of hypertension. Although the exact mechanism of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is unclear, emerging evidence implicates epigenetic regulation involving DNA methylation. Our purpose was to investigate whether 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (Aza), a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) inhibitor, reduces high blood pressure (BP) by regulating aortic ECM remodeling in HHcy. Wild-type and cystathionine β-synthase (CBS)(+/-) HHcy mice were treated with Aza (0.5 mg/kg body weight). In HHcy mice, Aza treatment normalized the plasma homocysteine (Hcy) level and BP. Thoracic and abdominal aorta ultrasound revealed a reduction in the resistive index and wall-to-lumen ratio. Vascular response to phenylephrine, acetylcholine, and sodium nitroprusside improved after Aza in HHcy mice. Histology showed a marked reduction in collagen deposition in the aorta. Aza treatment decreased the expression of DNMT1, MMP9, TIMP1, and S-adenosyl homocysteine hydrolase (SAHH) and upregulated methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). We conclude that reduction of DNA methylation by Aza in HHcy reduces adverse aortic remodeling to mitigate hypertension.<newchar>5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine<n-term>DNA methylation<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term><newabs>25217861<newchar>Early wound healing is associated with fibroblasts assembling a provisional fibronectin-rich extracellular matrix (ECM), which is subsequently remodeled and interlaced by type I collagen. This exposes fibroblasts to time-variant sets of matrices during different stages of wound healing. Our goal was thus to gain insight into the ECM-driven functional regulation of human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) being either anchored to a fibronectin (Fn) or to a collagen-decorated matrix, in the absence or presence of cyclic mechanical strain. While the cells reoriented in response to the onset of uniaxial cyclic strain, cells assembled exogenously added Fn with a preferential Fn-fiber alignment along their new orientation. Exposure of HFFs to exogenous Fn resulted in an increase in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression levels, i.e. MMP-15 (RT-qPCR), and MMP-9 activity (zymography), while subsequent exposure to collagen slightly reduced MMP-15 expression and MMP-9 activity compared to Fn-exposure alone. Cyclic strain upregulated Fn fibrillogenesis and actin stress fiber formation, but had comparatively little effect on MMP activity. We thus propose that the appearance of collagen might start to steer HFFs towards homeostasis, as it decreased both MMP secretion and the tension of Fn matrix fibrils as assessed by Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer. These results suggest that HFFs might have a high ECM remodeling or repair capacity in contact with Fn alone (early event), which is reduced in the presence of Col1 (later event), thereby down-tuning HFF activity, a processes which would be required in a tissue repair process to finally reach tissue homeostasis.<newchar>Cyclic stretching<n-term>FRET-based molecular tension sensors<n-term>Human foreskin fibroblasts<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Mechanobiology<n-term><newabs>26743193<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is increasingly recognized as an important regulator in breast cancer. ECM in breast cancer development features numerous changes in composition and organization when compared to the mammary gland under homeostasis. Matrix proteins that are induced in breast cancer include fibrillar collagens, fibronectin, specific laminins and proteoglycans as well as matricellular proteins. Growing evidence suggests that many of these induced ECM proteins play a major functional role in breast cancer progression and metastasis. A number of the induced ECM proteins have moreover been shown to be essential components of metastatic niches, promoting stem/progenitor signaling pathways and metastatic growth. ECM remodeling enzymes are also markedly increased, leading to major changes in the matrix structure and biomechanical properties. Importantly, several ECM components and ECM remodeling enzymes are specifically induced in breast cancer or during tissue regeneration while healthy tissues under homeostasis express exceedingly low levels. This may indicate that ECM and ECM-associated functions may represent promising drug targets against breast cancer, providing important specificity that could be utilized when developing therapies.<newchar>Breast cancer<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>Niche<n-term>Therapy<n-term><newabs>25204635<newchar>Asthma in the pediatric population remains a significant contributor to morbidity and increasing healthcare costs. Vitamin D3 insufficiency and deficiency have been associated with development of asthma. Recent studies in models of adult airway diseases suggest that the bioactive Vitamin D3 metabolite, calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 ; 1,25(OH)2 D3 ), modulates responses to inflammation; however, this concept has not been explored in developing airways in the context of pediatric asthma. We used human fetal airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells as a model of the early postnatal airway to explore how calcitriol modulates remodeling induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines. Cells were pre-treated with calcitriol and then exposed to TNFα or TGFβ for up to 72 h. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, production of extracellular matrix (ECM), and cell proliferation were assessed. Calcitriol attenuated TNFα enhancement of MMP-9 expression and activity. Additionally, calcitriol attenuated TNFα and TGFβ-induced collagen III expression and deposition, and separately, inhibited proliferation of fetal ASM cells induced by either inflammatory mediator. Analysis of signaling pathways suggested that calcitriol effects in fetal ASM involve ERK signaling, but not other major inflammatory pathways. Overall, our data demonstrate that calcitriol can blunt multiple effects of TNFα and TGFβ in developing airway, and point to a potentially novel approach to alleviating structural changes in inflammatory airway diseases of childhood.<newchar><newabs>23792086<newchar>Extracellular matrices (ECMs) represent a complex network of proteins, proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), composed of independent structural domains, ultimately constituting the cell microenvironment. As a highly organized, insoluble suprastructure, the ECM can, in a spatially patterned and regulated manner, integrate and deliver multiple complex signals to cells that affect their behavior. During the progression of carcinogenesis, tumor cells, through a continually changing interface, remodel and simultaneously interact with the components of ECM, as well as with surrounding stromal cells. Within this complex network of ECM components affecting tumor progression, reactive oxygen species/reactive nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) play a wide emerging role. In this minireview we will focus on the ROS-dependent modulations of tumor ECM and how this in turn affects the insidious pathways of tumor progression and dissemination.<newchar>CS<n-term>DS<n-term>ECM<n-term>EMT<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>GAG<n-term>Glycosaminoglycans<n-term>HA<n-term>HS<n-term>KS<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>ROS<n-term>Tumor<n-term>chondroitin sulfate<n-term>dermatan sulfate<n-term>epithelial–mesenchymal transition<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glycosaminoglycans<n-term>heparan sulfate<n-term>hyaluronan<n-term>keratan sulfate<n-term>reactive oxygen species<n-term><newabs>25791470<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are widely used in both preclinical animal studies and in many clinical applications to repair and reconstruct tissues. Recently, 3-dimensional ECM constructs have been investigated for use in whole organ engineering applications. ECM scaffolds are prepared by decellularization of mammalian tissues and the ECM provides natural biologic cues that facilitate the restoration of site appropriate and functional tissue. Preservation of the native ECM constituents (i.e., three-dimensional ultrastructure and biochemical composition) during the decellularization process would theoretically result in the ideal scaffold for tissue remodeling. However, all methods of decellularization invariably disrupt the ECM to some degree. Decellularization of tissues and organs for the production of ECM bioscaffolds requires a balance between maintaining native ECM structure and the removal of cellular materials such as DNA, mitochondria, membrane lipids, and cytosolic proteins. These remnant cellular components can elicit an adverse inflammatory response and inhibit constructive remodeling if not adequately removed. Many variables including cell density, matrix density, thickness, and morphology can affect the extent of tissue and organ decellularization and thus the integrity and physical properties of the resulting ECM scaffold. This review describes currently used decellularization techniques, and the effects of these techniques upon the host response to the material.<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term><newabs>22437309<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is an extracellular scaffold composed of complex mixtures of proteins that plays a pivotal role in tumor progression. ECM remodeling is crucial for tumor migration and invasion during the process of metastasis. ECM can be remodeled by several processes including synthesis, contraction and proteolytic degradation. In order to cross through the ECM barriers, malignant cells produce a spectrum of extracellular proteinases including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), serine proteases (mainly the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system) and cysteine proteases to degrade ECM components. As major adhesion molecules to support cell attachment to ECM, integrins play critical roles in tumor progression by enhancing tumor cell survival, migration and invasion. Previous studies have shown that integrins can regulate the expression and activity of these proteases through different pathways. This review summarizes the roles of MMPs and uPA system in ECM remodeling and discusses the regulatory functions of integrins on these proteases in invasive tumors.<newchar><newabs>25597396<newchar>Cancer initiating cells (CICs) have been the focus of recent anti-cancer therapies, exhibiting strong invasion capability via potentially enhanced ability to remodel extracellular matrices (ECM). We have identified CICs in a human breast cancer cell line, MX-1, and developed a xenograft model in SCID mice. We investigated the CICs' matrix-remodeling effects using Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) microscopy to identify potential phenotypic signatures of the CIC-rich tumors. The isolated CICs exhibit higher proliferation, drug efflux and drug resistant properties in vitro; were more tumorigenic than non-CICs, resulting in more and larger tumors in the xenograft model. The CIC-rich tumors have less collagen in the tumor interior than in the CIC-poor tumors supporting the idea that the CICs can remodel the collagen more effectively. The collagen fibers were preferentially aligned perpendicular to the CIC-rich tumor boundary while parallel to the CIC-poor tumor boundary suggesting more invasive behavior of the CIC-rich tumors. These findings would provide potential translational values in quantifying and monitoring CIC-rich tumors in future anti-cancer therapies. CIC-rich tumors remodel the collagen matrix more than CIC-poor tumors.<newchar>Second Harmonic Generation microscopy<n-term>breast cancer<n-term>cancer initiating cells<n-term>collagen<n-term><newabs>25213186<newchar>Successful regenerative medicine strategies for functional tissue reconstruction include the in situ placement of acellular materials composed of the extracellular matrix (ECM) or individual components of the ECM. The composition and ultrastructure of these materials vary depending on multiple factors including the tissue source and species from which the materials are harvested, the methods of manufacture, the efficiency of decellularization, post-processing modifications such as chemical cross-linking or solubilization, and the methods of terminal sterilization. Appropriately configured materials have the ability to modulate different stages of the healing response by inducing a shift from a process of inflammation and scar tissue formation to one of constructive remodeling and functional tissue restoration. The events that facilitate such a dramatic change during the biomaterial-host interaction are complex and necessarily involve both the immune system and mechanisms of stem cell recruitment, growth, and differentiation. The present manuscript reviews the composition of biologic scaffolds, the methods and recommendations for manufacture, the mechanisms of the biomaterial-host interaction, and the clinical application of this regenerative medicine approach.<newchar><newabs>26904948<newchar>Muscle stem cells (MuSCs) exhibit distinct behavior during successive phases of developmental myogenesis. However, how their transition to adulthood is regulated is poorly understood. Here, we show that fetal MuSCs resist progenitor specification and exhibit altered division dynamics, intrinsic features that are progressively lost postnatally. After transplantation, fetal MuSCs expand more efficiently and contribute to muscle repair. Conversely, niche colonization efficiency increases in adulthood, indicating a balance between muscle growth and stem cell pool repopulation. Gene expression profiling identified several extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules preferentially expressed in fetal MuSCs, including tenascin-C, fibronectin, and collagen VI. Loss-of-function experiments confirmed their essential and stage-specific role in regulating MuSC function. Finally, fetal-derived paracrine factors were able to enhance adult MuSC regenerative potential. Together, these findings demonstrate that MuSCs change the way in which they remodel their microenvironment to direct stem cell behavior and support the unique demands of muscle development or repair.<newchar><newabs>24390076<newchar>The remodeling of the cervix from a rigid barrier into a compliant structure, which dilates to allow for delivery, is a critical process for a successful pregnancy. Changes in the mechanical properties of cervical tissue during remodeling are hypothesized to be related to the types of collagen crosslinks within the tissue. To further understand normal and abnormal cervical remodeling, we quantify the material properties and collagen crosslink density of cervical tissue throughout pregnancy from normal wild-type and Anthrax Toxin Receptor 2 knockout (Antxr2-/-) mice. Antxr2-/- females are known to have a parturition defect, in part, due to an excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins in the cervix, particularly collagen. In this study, we determined the mechanical properties in gestation-timed cervical samples by osmotic loading and measured the density of mature collagen crosslink, pyridinoline (PYD), by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS). The equilibrium material response of the tissue to loading was investigated using a hyperelastic material model where the stresses in the material are balanced by the osmotic swelling tendencies of the glycosaminoglycans and the tensile restoring forces of a randomly-oriented crosslinked collagen fiber network. This study shows that the swelling response of the cervical tissue increased with decreasing PYD density in normal remodeling. In the Antxr2-/- mice, there was no significant increase in swelling volume or significant decrease in crosslink density with advancing gestation. By comparing the ECM-mechanical response relationships in normal and disrupted parturition mouse models this study shows that a reduction of collagen crosslink density is related to cervical softening and contributes to the cervical remodeling process.<newchar><newabs>26780384<newchar>In the brain, extracellular matrix (ECM) components form networks that contribute to structural and functional diversity. Maladaptive remodeling of ECM networks has been reported in neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders, suggesting that the brain microenvironment is a dynamic structure. A lack of quantitative information about ECM distribution in the brain hinders an understanding of region-specific ECM functions and the role of ECM in health and disease. We hypothesized that each ECM protein as well as specific ECM structures, such as perineuronal nets (PNNs) and interstitial matrix, are differentially distributed throughout the brain, contributing to the unique structure and function in the various regions of the brain. To test our hypothesis, we quantitatively analyzed the distribution, colocalization, and protein expression of aggrecan, brevican, and tenascin-R throughout the rat brain utilizing immunohistochemistry and mass spectrometry analysis and assessed the effect of aggrecan, brevican, and/or tenascin-R on neurite outgrowth in vitro. We focused on aggrecan, brevican, and tenascin-R as they are especially expressed in the mature brain, and have established roles in brain development, plasticity, and neurite outgrowth. The results revealed a differentiated distribution of all three proteins throughout the brain and indicated that their presence significantly reduces neurite outgrowth in a 3D in vitro environment. These results underline the importance of a unique and complex ECM distribution for brain physiology and suggest that encoding the distribution of distinct ECM proteins throughout the brain will aid in understanding their function in physiology and in turn assist in identifying their role in disease. J. Comp. Neurol. 524:1309-1336, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.<newchar>RRID: AB_2207009<n-term>RRID: AB_398211<n-term>RRID: AB_90460<n-term>aggrecan<n-term>brain extracellular matrix<n-term>brevican<n-term>perineuronal nets<n-term>tenascin-R<n-term><newabs>26342086<newchar>Altered ECM protein deposition is a feature in asthmatic airways. Fibronectin (Fn), an ECM protein produced by human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs), is increased in asthmatic airways. This study investigated the regulation of Fn production in asthmatic or nonasthmatic HBECs and whether Fn modulated HBEC proliferation and inflammatory mediator secretion. The signaling pathways underlying transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1-regulated Fn production were examined using specific inhibitors for ERK, JNK, p38 MAPK, phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase, and activin-like kinase 5 (ALK5). Asthmatic HBECs deposited higher levels of Fn in the ECM than nonasthmatic cells under basal conditions, whereas cells from the two groups had similar levels of Fn mRNA and soluble Fn. TGF-β1 increased mRNA levels and ECM and soluble forms of Fn but decreased cell proliferation in both cells. The rate of increase in Fn mRNA was higher in nonasthmatic cells. However, the excessive amounts of ECM Fn deposited by asthmatic cells after TGF-β1 stimulation persisted compared with nonasthmatic cells. Inhibition of ALK5 completely prevented TGF-β1-induced Fn deposition. Importantly, ECM Fn increased HBEC proliferation and IL-6 release, decreased PGE2 secretion, but had no effect on VEGF release. Soluble Fn had no effect on cell proliferation and inflammatory mediator release. Asthmatic HBECs are intrinsically primed to produce more ECM Fn, which when deposited into the ECM, is capable of driving remodeling and inflammation. The increased airway Fn may be one of the key driving factors in the persistence of asthma and represents a novel, therapeutic target.<newchar>ECM protein<n-term>IL-6<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>airway epithelial cell<n-term>asthma<n-term>fibronectin<n-term><newabs>22628376<newchar>Chronic pulmonary hypertension (PH) leads to right-ventricular failure (RVF) characterized by RV remodeling. Ventricular remodeling is emerging as an important process during heart failure and recovery. Remodeling in RVF induced by PH is not fully understood. Recently we discovered that estrogen (E2) therapy can rescue severe preexisting PH. Here, we focused on whether E2 (42.5 μg·kg(-1)·day(-1), 10 days) can reverse adverse RV structural and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling induced by PH using monocrotaline (MCT, 60 mg/kg). RV fibrosis was evident in RVF males. Intact females developed less severe RV remodeling compared with males and ovariectomized (OVX) females. Novel ECM-degrading disintegrin-metalloproteinases ADAM15 and ADAM17 transcripts were elevated ∼2-fold in all RVF animals. E2 therapy reversed RV remodeling in all groups. In vitro, E2 directly inhibited ANG II-induced expression of fibrosis markers as well as the metalloproteinases in cultured cardiac fibroblasts. Estrogen receptor-β agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN) but not estrogen receptor-α agonist 4,4',4″-(4-propyl-[1H]-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) was as effective as E2 in inhibiting expression of these genes. Expression of ECM-interacting cardiac fetal-gene osteopontin (OPN) also increased ∼9-fold in RVF males. Intact females were partially protected from OPN upregulation (∼2-fold) but OVX females were not. E2 reversed OPN upregulation in all groups. Upregulation of OPN was also reversed in vitro by E2. Plasma OPN was elevated in RVF (∼1.5-fold) and decreased to control levels in the E2 group. RVF resulted in elevated Akt phosphorylation, but not ERK, in the RV, and E2 therapy restored Akt phosphorylation. In conclusion, E2 therapy reverses adverse RV remodeling associated with PH by reversing fibrosis and upregulation of novel ECM enzymes ADAM15, ADAM17, and OPN. These effects are likely mediated through estrogen receptor-β.<newchar><newabs>25880510<newchar>Despite significant advances in treating heart disease, heart failure remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Regardless of the initiating cause(s), heart failure is associated with disruptions in the myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM is a dynamic structure and its physiological turnover is mediated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs). Research in the past two decades has revealed that the function of ECM extends beyond its role in providing structural support. Similarly, ECM regulatory proteins, MMPs and TIMPs, have been demonstrated to play diverse and ECM-independent roles in tissue remodeling and homeostasis. ECM is a network structure that in addition to providing structural support, serves as an extracellular reservoir for a number of growth factors and cytokines, and plays a central role in interstitial transport of different molecules (hormones, growth factors, drugs, etc.). This is mainly through the action of nonstructural ECM components, proteoglycans and matricellular proteins, which are also critical in cell-ECM interactions and overall ECM remodeling. As such, sustaining the ECM integrity is not only critical in preserving cardiac geometry and function, it is essential in ensuring optimal delivery of different molecules to their site of action. Further, ECM composition and integrity in disease should be considered in designing drugs with a specific site of action. In this review article, we provide an overview of the ECM structure, components, its function in interstitial transport, heart disease-dependent ECM remodeling, and the potential therapeutic approaches in preserving the diseased myocardial ECM and cardiac function.<newchar><newabs>26318535<newchar>Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play a crucial role in organizing the synaptic interface and regulating synapse activity. In turn, CAMs can influence a variety of higher brain functions. In addition to their bona fide interacting partners on the apposed cell surface or the extracellular matrix (ECM) with which they form molecular bridges, synaptic CAMs bind to many other proteins with their intracellular and extracellular domains. The resulting multi-molecular complexes at the active zone and at the postsynaptic density (PSD) are thought to anchor components requisite for synaptic transmission. Recent studies demonstrating the proteolytic cleavage of synaptic CAMs underscore an exciting mechanism through which the synaptic microenvironment can be altered and thereby finely tune the efficacy of synaptic transmission.<newchar><newabs>24768766<newchar>We evaluated whether aliskiren, valsartan, or a combination of both was protective following myocardial infarction (MI) through effects on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9. C57BL/6J wild type (WT, n=94) and MMP-9 null (null, n=85) mice were divided into 4 groups at 3h post-MI: saline (S), aliskiren (A; 50mg/kg/day), valsartan (V; 40mg/kg/day), or A+V and compared to no MI controls at 28days post-MI. All groups had similar infarct areas, and survival rates were higher in the null mice. The treatments influenced systolic function and hypertrophy index, as well as extracellular matrix (ECM) and inflammatory genes in the remote region, indicating that primary effects were on the viable myocardium. Saline treated WT mice showed increased end systolic and diastolic volumes and hypertrophy index, along with reduced ejection fraction. MMP-9 deletion improved LV function post-MI. Aliskiren attenuated the increase in end systolic volume and hypertrophy index, while valsartan improved end diastolic volumes and aliskiren+valsartan improved the hypertrophy index only when MMP-9 was absent. Extracellular matrix and inflammatory gene expression showed distinct patterns among the treatment groups, indicating a divergence in mechanisms of remodeling. This study shows that MMP-9 regulates aliskiren and valsartan effects in mice. These results in mice provide mechanistic insight to help translate these findings to post-MI patients.<newchar>Aliskiren<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>MMP-9<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term>Remodeling<n-term>Valsartan<n-term><newabs>25044252<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as collagen type I and elastin, and intermediate filament (IMF) proteins, such as vimentin are modified and dysregulated as part of the malignant changes leading to disruption of tissue homeostasis. Noninvasive biomarkers that reflect such changes may have a great potential for cancer. Levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) generated fragments of type I collagen (C1M), of elastin (ELM), and of citrullinated vimentin (VICM) were measured in serum from patients with lung cancer (n = 40), gastrointestinal cancer (n = 25), prostate cancer (n = 14), malignant melanoma (n = 7), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (n = 13), and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (n = 10), as well as in age-matched controls (n = 33). The area under the receiver operating characteristics (AUROC) was calculated and a diagnostic decision tree generated from specific cutoff values. C1M and VICM were significantly elevated in lung cancer patients as compared with healthy controls (AUROC = 0.98, P &lt; 0.0001) and other cancers (AUROC = 0.83 P &lt; 0.0001). A trend was detected when comparing lung cancer with COPD+IPF. No difference could be seen for ELM. Interestingly, C1M and VICM were able to identify patients with lung cancer with a positive predictive value of 0.9 and an odds ratio of 40 (95% CI = 8.7-186, P &lt; 0.0001). Biomarkers specifically reflecting degradation of collagen type I and citrullinated vimentin are applicable for lung cancer patients. Our data indicate that biomarkers reflecting ECM and IMF protein dysregulation are highly applicable in the lung cancer setting. We speculate that these markers may aid in diagnosing and characterizing patients with lung cancer.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>lung cancer<n-term>protein fingerprint<n-term>remodeling<n-term>serum biomarkers<n-term>tumor tissue<n-term><newabs>25965995<newchar>The development of myopia is associated with scleral remodeling, but it is unclear which factors regulate this process. This study investigated bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) expression in the sclera of guinea pigs with lens-induced myopia (LIM) and after recovery from myopia and evaluated the effect of BMP-2 on extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis in human scleral fibroblasts (HSFs) cultured in vitro. Lens-induced myopia was brought about in two groups of guinea pigs (the lens-induced myopia and myopia recovery groups) by placing -4.00 D lenses on the right eye for three weeks. The left eye served as a contralateral control. In the recovery group, the lenses were removed after one week. The refractive power and axial length of the eyes were measured, and the BMP-2 expression levels in the sclera were measured. After three weeks, the lens-induced eyes acquired relative myopia in both groups of guinea pigs. Immunostaining of the eyeballs revealed significantly decreased BMP-2 expression in the posterior sclera of the myopic eyes compared to the contralateral eyes. One week after lens removal, BMP-2 expression recovered, and no differences were observed between the experimental and contralateral eyes in the recovery group. HSFs were cultured with BMP-2 or transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1). Type I and type III collagen synthesis was significantly up-regulated following BMP-2 treatment in culture after one and two weeks, but the ratio of type III to type I collagen mRNA was not increased. Biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and aggrecan was increased in HSFs treated with BMP-2. Some chondrogenesis-associated genes expression increased in HSFs treated with BMP-2. From this study, we concluded that BMP-2 is involved in scleral remodeling in the development and recovery of lens-induced myopia.<newchar><newabs>25768932<newchar>Tendon is a dynamic tissue whose structure and function is influenced by mechanical loading, but little is known about the fundamental mechanisms that regulate tendon growth and remodeling in vivo. Data from cultured tendon fibroblasts indicated that the p38 MAPK pathway plays an important role in tendon fibroblast proliferation and collagen synthesis in vitro. To gain greater insight into the mechanisms of tendon growth, and explore the role of p38 MAPK signaling in this process, we tested the hypotheses that inducing plantaris tendon growth through the ablation of the synergist Achilles tendon would result in rapid expansion of a neotendon matrix surrounding the original tendon, and that treatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 would prevent this growth. Rats were treated with vehicle or SB203580, and subjected to synergist ablation by bilateral tenectomy of the Achilles tendon. Changes in histological and biochemical properties of plantaris tendons were analyzed 3, 7, or 28 days after overload, and comparisons were made to non-overloaded animals. By 28 days after overload, tendon mass had increased by 30% compared to non-overloaded samples, and cross-sectional area (CSA) increased by around 50%, with most of the change occurring in the neotendon. The expansion in CSA initially occurred through the synthesis of a hyaluronic acid rich matrix that was progressively replaced with mature collagen. Pericytes were present in areas of active tendon growth, but never in the original tendon ECM. Inhibition of p38 MAPK resulted in a profound decrease in IL6 expression, and had a modest effect on the expression of other ECM and cell proliferation genes, but had a negligible impact on overall tendon growth. The combined results from this study provided novel insights into tendon mechanobiology, and suggest that p38 MAPK signaling does not appear to be necessary for tendon growth in vivo.<newchar><newabs>26605330<newchar>Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is associated with structural and functional alterations of the peritoneal membrane, consisting of fibrosis, angiogenesis, and loss of ultrafiltration capacity. Vitamin D receptor activation (VDRA) plays an important role in mineral metabolism and inflammation, but also antiangiogenic and antifibrotic properties have been reported. Therefore, the effects of active vitamin D treatment on peritoneal function and remodeling were investigated. Rats were either kept naïve to PDF exposure or daily exposed to 10 mL PDF and were treated for five or seven weeks with oral paricalcitol or vehicle control. Non-PDF-exposed rats showed no peritoneal changes upon paricalcitol treatment. Paricalcitol reduced endogenous calcitriol but did not affect mineral homeostasis. However, upon PDF exposure, loss of ultrafiltration capacity ensued which was fully rescued by paricalcitol treatment. Furthermore, PD-induced ECM thickening was significantly reduced and omental PD-induced angiogenesis was less pronounced upon paricalcitol treatment. No effect of paricalcitol treatment on total amount of peritoneal cells, peritoneal leukocyte composition, and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) was observed. Our data indicates that oral VDRA reduces tissue remodeling during chronic experimental PD and prevents loss of ultrafiltration capacity. Therefore, VDRA is potentially relevant in the prevention of treatment technique failure in PD patients.<newchar><newabs>23918940<newchar>The endothelial CCM complex regulates blood vessel stability and permeability. Loss-of-function mutations in CCM genes are responsible for human cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs), which are characterized by clusters of hemorrhagic dilated capillaries composed of endothelium lacking mural cells and altered sub-endothelial extracellular matrix (ECM). Association of the CCM1/2 complex with ICAP-1, an inhibitor of β1 integrin, prompted us to investigate whether the CCM complex interferes with integrin signaling. We demonstrate that CCM1/2 loss resulted in ICAP-1 destabilization, which increased β1 integrin activation and led to increased RhoA-dependent contractility. The resulting abnormal distribution of forces led to aberrant ECM remodeling around lesions of CCM1- and CCM2-deficient mice. ICAP-1-deficient vessels displayed similar defects. We demonstrate that a positive feedback loop between the aberrant ECM and internal cellular tension led to decreased endothelial barrier function. Our data support that up-regulation of β1 integrin activation participates in the progression of CCM lesions by destabilizing intercellular junctions through increased cell contractility and aberrant ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23840100<newchar>Abnormal angiogenesis and vascular remodeling contribute to pathogenesis of a number of disorders such as tumor, arthritis, atherosclerosis, restenosis, hypertension, and neurodegeneration. During angiogenesis and vascular remodeling, behaviors of stem/progenitor cells, endothelial cells (ECs), and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and its interaction with extracellular matrix (ECM) play a critical role in the processes. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), well-known inflammatory mediators are a family of zinc-dependent proteolytic enzymes that degrade various components of ECM and non-ECM molecules mediating tissue remodeling in both physiological and pathological processes. MMPs including MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-8, MMP-9, MMP-12, and MT1-MMP, are stimulated and activated by various stimuli in vascular tissues. Once activated, MMPs degrade ECM proteins or other related signal molecules to promote recruitment of stem/progenitor cells and facilitate migration and invasion of ECs and VSMCs. Moreover, vascular cell proliferation and apoptosis can also be regulated by MMPs via proteolytically cleaving and modulating bioactive molecules and relevant signaling pathways. Regarding the importance of vascular cells in abnormal angiogenesis and vascular remodeling, regulation of vascular cell behaviors through modulating expression and activation of MMPs shows therapeutic potential.<newchar><newabs>25012731<newchar>Uterine leiomyoma, commonly known as fibroids, is a benign neoplasm of smooth muscle in women. The incidence of clinically symptomatic fibroids in reproductive-age women is approximately 20 %, with nearly 80 % of black women suffering from this condition. Symptoms include severe pain and hemorrhage; fibroids are also a major cause of infertility or sub-fertility in women. Uterine leiomyoma consist of hyperplastic smooth muscle cells and an excess deposition of extracellular matrix, specifically collagen, fibronectin, and sulfated proteoglycans. Extracellular matrix components interact and signal through integrin-β1 on the surface of uterine leiomyoma smooth muscle cells, provide growth factor storage, and act as co-receptors for growth factor-receptor binding. ECM and growth factor signaling through integrin-β1 and growth factor receptors significantly increases cell proliferation and ECM deposition in uterine leiomyoma. Growth factors TGF-β, IGF, PDGF, FGF and EGF are all shown to promote uterine leiomyoma progression and signal through multiple pathways to increase the expression of genes encoding matrix or matrix-modifying proteins. Decreasing integrin expression, reducing growth factor action and inhibiting ECM action on uterine leiomyoma smooth muscle cells are important opportunities to treat uterine leiomyoma without use of the current surgical procedures. Both natural compounds and chemicals are shown to decrease fibrosis and uterine leiomyoma progression, but further analysis is needed to make inroads in treating this common women's health issue.<newchar><newabs>24741709<newchar>Inflammation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling are important components regulating the response of the left ventricle to myocardial infarction (MI). Significant cellular- and molecular-level contributors can be identified by analyzing data acquired through high-throughput genomic and proteomic technologies that provide expression levels for thousands of genes and proteins. Large-scale data provide both temporal and spatial information that need to be analyzed and interpreted using systems biology approaches in order to integrate this information into dynamic models that predict and explain mechanisms of cardiac healing post-MI. In this review, we summarize the systems biology approaches needed to computationally simulate post-MI remodeling, including data acquisition, data analysis for biomarker classification and identification, data integration to build dynamic models, and data interpretation for biological functions. An example for applying a systems biology approach to ECM remodeling is presented as a reference illustration.<newchar><newabs>23532927<newchar>The left ventricle (LV) responds to a myocardial infarction with an orchestrated sequence of events that result in fundamental changes to both the structure and function of the myocardium. This collection of responses is termed as LV remodeling. Myocardial ischemia resulting in necrosis is the initiating event that culminates in the formation of an extracellular matrix (ECM) rich infarct scar that replaces necrotic myocytes. While the cardiomyocyte is the major cell type that responds to ischemia, infiltrating leukocytes and cardiac fibroblasts coordinate the subsequent wound healing response. The matrix metalloproteinase family of enzymes regulates the inflammatory and ECM responses that modulate scar formation. Matridomics is the proteomic evaluation focused on ECM, while degradomics is the proteomic evaluation of proteases as well as their inhibitors and substrates. This review will summarize the use of proteomics to better understand matrix metalloproteinase roles in post myocardial infarction LV remodeling.<newchar>Degradomics<n-term>Matridomics<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term><newabs>23319217<newchar>Cellular therapy using stem cells for cardiac diseases has recently gained much interest in the scientific community due to its potential in regenerating damaged and even dead tissue and thereby restoring the organ function. Stem cells from various sources and origin are being currently used for regeneration studies directly or along with differentiation inducing agents. Long term survival and minimal side effects can be attained by using autologous cells and reduced use of inducing agents. Cardiomyogenic differentiation of adult derived stem cells has been previously reported using various inducing agents but the use of a potentially harmful DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine (5-azaC) has been found to be critical in almost all studies. Alternate inducing factors and conditions/stimulant like physical condition including electrical stimulation, chemical inducers and biological agents have been attempted by numerous groups to induce cardiac differentiation. Biomaterials were initially used as artificial scaffold in in vitro studies and later as a delivery vehicle. Natural ECM is the ideal biological scaffold since it contains all the components of the tissue from which it was derived except for the living cells. Constructive remodeling can be performed using such natural ECM scaffolds and stem cells since, the cells can be delivered to the site of infraction and once delivered the cells adhere and are not &quot;lost&quot;. Due to the niche like conditions of ECM, stem cells tend to differentiate into tissue specific cells and attain several characteristics similar to that of functional cells even in absence of any directed differentiation using external inducers. The development of niche mimicking biomaterials and hybrid biomaterial can further advance directed differentiation without specific induction. The mechanical and electrical integration of these materials to the functional tissue is a problem to be addressed. The search for the perfect extracellular matrix for therapeutic applications including engineering cardiac tissue structures for post ischemic cardiac tissue regeneration continues.<newchar><newabs>24871103<newchar>Osteopontin (OPN) is a multifunctional extracellular matrix (ECM) protein involved in multiple physiological processes. OPN expression is dramatically increased in visceral adipose tissue in obesity and the lack of OPN protects against the development of insulin resistance and inflammation in mice. We sought to unravel the potential mechanisms involved in the beneficial effects of the absence of OPN. We analyzed the effect of the lack of OPN in the development of obesity and hepatic steatosis induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) using OPN-KO mice. OPN expression was upregulated in epididymal white adipose tissue (EWAT) and liver in wild type (WT) mice with HFD. OPN-KO mice had higher insulin sensitivity, lower body weight and fat mass with reduced adipose tissue ECM remodeling and reduced adipocyte size than WT mice under a HFD. Reduced MMP2 and MMP9 activity was involved in the decreased ECM remodeling. Crown-like structure number in EWAT as well as F4/80-positive cells and Emr1 expression in EWAT and liver increased with HFD, while OPN-deficiency blunted the increase. Moreover, our data show for the first time that OPN-KO under a HFD mice display reduced fibrosis in adipose tissue and liver, as well as reduced oxidative stress in adipose tissue. Gene expression of collagens Col1a1, Col6a1 and Col6a3 in EWAT and liver, as well as the profibrotic cytokine Tgfb1 in EWAT were increased with HFD, while OPN-deficiency prevented this increase. OPN deficiency prevented hepatic steatosis via reduction in the expression of molecules involved in the onset of fat accumulation such as Pparg, Srebf1, Fasn, Mogat1, Dgat2 and Cidec. Furthermore, OPN-KO mice exhibited higher body temperature and improved BAT function. The present data reveal novel mechanisms of OPN in the development of obesity, pointing out the inhibition of OPN as a promising target for the treatment of obesity and fatty liver.<newchar><newabs>25976729<newchar>The response of the right ventricle (RV) to pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) involves changes in contractile function, chamber size, hypertrophy, and extracellular matrix (ECM). Galectin-3 (Gal-3) is a mediator of myocardial ECM metabolism and biomarker for left heart remodeling, yet its ability to reflect RV remodeling is unknown. We hypothesized that serum Gal-3 levels correlate with RV morphology and function in PAH, and that Gal-3 is associated with circulating markers of ECM. Fifteen subjects with PAH and 10 age-matched controls underwent same-day echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, and phlebotomy for Gal-3 and ECM biomarkers including N-terminal propeptide of type III collagen type (PIIINP), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1), and hyaluronic acid (HA). RV ejection fraction, end diastolic volume index, end systolic volume index, and mass index were calculated using CMR. Echocardiography was used to estimate RV systolic pressure and measure RV strain. Serum Gal-3, TIMP-1, and HA levels were all significantly increased in PAH subjects when compared to controls. Gal-3 correlated with RV ejection fraction (ρ -0.44, p 0.03), end diastolic volume index (ρ 0.42, p 0.03), end systolic volume index (ρ 0.44, p 0.027), mass index (ρ 0.47, p 0.016), systolic pressure (ρ 0.55, p &lt; 0.001), and strain (ρ 0.43, p 0.03). Gal-3 levels positively correlated with the ECM markers TIMP-1 and HA but not with PIIINP. In conclusion, Gal-3 levels are associated with multiple indices of RV function and morphology. Gal-3 may represent a novel biomarker for RV remodeling and associated ECM turnover in PAH.<newchar>Biomarker<n-term>Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging<n-term>Myocardial fibrosis<n-term>Pulmonary hypertension<n-term>Right ventricle<n-term><newabs>26657457<newchar>To assess the effect of basic fibroblast growth factor-binding extracellular matrix (bFGF-ECM) combined with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) transplantation on acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and explore the underlying mechenisms. Rabbit hearts were processed by decellularization with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) perfusion, heparin immobilization, bFGF-binding and homogenization, for preparation of bFGF-binding cardiac ECM suspension (bFGF-ECM). Thereafter, the characteristics of bFGF release were analyzed in vitro. Following ligation of the mid-third of the left anterior descending artery, the rabbits were divided into a control group (no treatment), BMSCs group (BMSCs transplantation), bFGF-ECM group (bFGF-ECM implantation), and BMSCs + bFGF-ECM group (BMSCs and bFGF-ECM implantation). Apoptosis and differentiation of implanted BMSCs, and the left ventricular (LV) remodeling and function were assessed. The ex vivo proliferation, apoptosis, migration and differentiation of BMSCs were determined after exposure to bFGF and/or ECM. The ECM could sustainably release bFGF. 24 h and 6 weeks after the operation, improved viability and differentiation of the implanted BMSCs, as well as inhibited dilatation and preserved function of the left ventricle (LV), were significant in the BMSCs  +  bFGF-ECM group compared with other groups (P &lt; 0.05), although BMSCs and ECM-bFGF groups also showed better results than control group (P &lt; 0.05). Additionally, ECM and bFGF showed a synergistic effect on BMSCs proliferation, viability, migration and differentiation. The combination of bFGF-binding ECM and BMSCs implantation may promote myocardial regeneration and LV function, and become a new strategy for the treatment of AMI.<newchar><newabs>22194305<newchar>Growth and morphogenesis during embryonic development, asexual reproduction and regeneration require extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We used the simple metazoan Hydra to examine the fate of ECM during tissue morphogenesis and asexual budding. In growing Hydra, epithelial cells constantly move towards the extremities of the animal and into outgrowing buds. It is not known, whether these tissue movements involve epithelial migration relative to the underlying matrix or whether cells and ECM are displaced as a composite structure. Furthermore, it is unclear, how the ECM is remodeled to adapt to the shape of developing buds and tentacles. To address these questions, we used a new in vivo labeling technique for Hydra collagen-1 and laminin, and tracked the fate of ECM in all body regions of the animal. Our results reveal that Hydra 'tissue movements' are largely displacements of epithelial cells together with associated ECM. By contrast, during the evagination of buds and tentacles, extensive movement of epithelial cells relative to the matrix is observed, together with local ECM remodeling. These findings provide new insights into the nature of growth and morphogenesis in epithelial tissues.<newchar><newabs>25539853<newchar>Elastin plays a pivotal role in lung development. We therefore queried if elastin haploinsufficient newborn mice (Eln(+/-)) would exhibit abnormal lung structure and function related to modified extracellular matrix (ECM) composition. Because mechanical ventilation (MV) has been linked to dysregulated elastic fiber formation in the newborn lung, we also asked if elastin haploinsufficiency would accentuate lung growth arrest seen after prolonged MV of neonatal mice. We studied 5-day-old wild-type (Eln(+/+)) and Eln(+/-) littermates at baseline and after MV with air for 8-24 h. Lungs of unventilated Eln(+/-) mice contained ∼50% less elastin and ∼100% more collagen-1 and lysyl oxidase compared with Eln(+/+) pups. Eln(+/-) lungs contained fewer capillaries than Eln(+/+) lungs, without discernible differences in alveolar structure. In response to MV, lung tropoelastin and elastase activity increased in Eln(+/+) neonates, whereas tropoelastin decreased and elastase activity was unchanged in Eln(+/-) mice. Fibrillin-1 protein increased in lungs of both groups during MV, more in Eln(+/-) than in Eln(+/+) pups. In both groups, MV caused capillary loss, with larger and fewer alveoli compared with unventilated controls. Respiratory system elastance, which was less in unventilated Eln(+/-) compared with Eln(+/+) mice, was similar in both groups after MV. These results suggest that elastin haploinsufficiency adversely impacts pulmonary angiogenesis and that MV dysregulates elastic fiber integrity, with further loss of lung capillaries, lung growth arrest, and impaired respiratory function in both Eln(+/+) and Eln(+/-) mice. Paucity of lung capillaries in Eln(+/-) newborns might help explain subsequent development of pulmonary hypertension previously reported in adult Eln(+/-) mice.<newchar>collagen<n-term>elastic fiber formation<n-term>extracellular matrix components<n-term>lung cell apoptosis<n-term>lung growth and development<n-term>lysyl oxidase and fibrillins<n-term>pulmonary capillaries<n-term><newabs>23935614<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a critical step of many biological and pathological processes. However, most of the studies to date lack a quantitative method to measure ECM remodeling at a scale comparable to cell size. Here, we applied image spatial correlation to collagen second harmonic generation (SHG) images to quantitatively evaluate the degree of collagen remodeling by cells. We propose a simple statistical method based on spatial correlation functions to determine the size of high collagen density area around cells. We applied our method to measure collagen remodeling by two breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7), which display different degrees of invasiveness, and a fibroblast cell line (NIH/3T3). We found distinct collagen compaction levels of these three cell lines by applying the spatial correlation method, indicating different collagen remodeling ability. Furthermore, we quantitatively measured the effect of Latrunculin B and Marimastat on MDA-MB-231 cell line collagen remodeling ability and showed that significant collagen compaction level decreases with these treatments.<newchar><newabs>25651034<newchar>COPD is projected to be the third most common cause of mortality world-wide by 2020((1)). Animal models of COPD are used to identify molecules that contribute to the disease process and to test the efficacy of novel therapies for COPD. Researchers use a number of models of COPD employing different species including rodents, guinea-pigs, rabbits, and dogs((2)). However, the most widely-used model is that in which mice are exposed to cigarette smoke. Mice are an especially useful species in which to model COPD because their genome can readily be manipulated to generate animals that are either deficient in, or over-express individual proteins. Studies of gene-targeted mice that have been exposed to cigarette smoke have provided valuable information about the contributions of individual molecules to different lung pathologies in COPD((3-5)). Most studies have focused on pathways involved in emphysema development which contributes to the airflow obstruction that is characteristic of COPD. However, small airway fibrosis also contributes significantly to airflow obstruction in human COPD patients((6)), but much less is known about the pathogenesis of this lesion in smoke-exposed animals. To address this knowledge gap, this protocol quantifies both emphysema development and small airway fibrosis in smoke-exposed mice. This protocol exposes mice to CS using a whole-body exposure technique, then measures respiratory mechanics in the mice, inflates the lungs of mice to a standard pressure, and fixes the lungs in formalin. The researcher then stains the lung sections with either Gill's stain to measure the mean alveolar chord length (as a readout of emphysema severity) or Masson's trichrome stain to measure deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins around small airways (as a readout of small airway fibrosis). Studies of the effects of molecular pathways on both of these lung pathologies will lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of COPD.<newchar><newabs>23571024<newchar>Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) results in chronic progressive right ventricular (RV) pressure overload and shunt hypoxemia. We investigated the global changes in the proteome of RV among infant patients with and without TOF to gain an insight into early RV remodeling. One hundred and thirty-six differentially expressed proteins were identified using label-free LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Western blot results revealed that the expression of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase 2 (PFKFB2) increased significantly in TOF patients; and levels of lysocardiolipin acyltransferase 1 (LCLAT1), lumican (LUM), and versican (VCAN) decreased significantly. QRT-PCR analysis showed that levels of PFKFB2 mRNA were markedly increased, but those of LCLAT1 and LUM were significantly decreased. VCAN mRNA showed no significant change in response to pathophysiology of TOF. The results of immunohistochemical staining were similar to those of Western blot analysis. Results of the proteomic analysis indicated that the level of glycolysis-related proteins had increased and levels of lipid-metabolism-related proteins had decreased. ECM proteins were found to be more down-regulated in TOF in the present study than in previous reports. Taken together, our findings may provide clues to both the metabolic inflexibility and ECM remodeling during the early RV remodeling, which occur in response to chronic hypoxia and long-term pressure overload in TOF patients.<newchar><newabs>22940282<newchar>Cigarette smoking is a significant risk factor for atherosclerosis, which involves the invasion of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) from the media to intima. A hallmark of many invasive cells is actin cytoskeletal remodeling in the form of podosomes, accompanied by extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation. A7r5 VSMCs form podosomes in response to PKC activation. In this study, we found that cigarette smoke extract, nicotine, and the cholinergic agonist, carbachol, were similarly effective in inducing the formation of podosome rosettes in A7r5 VSMCs. α-Bungarotoxin and atropine experiments confirmed the involvement of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). Western blotting and immunofluorescence experiments revealed the aggregation of nAChRs at podosome rosettes. Cycloheximide experiments and media exchange experiments suggested that autocrine factor(s) and intracellular phenotypic modulation are putative mechanisms. In situ zymography experiments indicated that, in response to PKC activation, nicotine-treated cells degraded ECM near podosome rosettes, and possibly endocytose ECM fragments to intracellular compartments. Invasion assay of human aortic smooth muscle cells indicated that nicotine and PKC activation individually and synergistically enhanced cell invasion through ECM. Results from this study suggest that nicotine enhances the ability of VSMCs to degrade and invade ECM. nAChR activation, actin cytoskeletal remodeling and phenotypic modulation are possible mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>23046407<newchar>Increased attention is paid to the structural components of tissues. These components are mostly collagens and various proteoglycans. Emerging evidence suggests that altered components and noncoded modifications of the matrix may be both initiators and drivers of disease, exemplified by excessive tissue remodeling leading to tissue stiffness, as well as by changes in the signaling potential of both intact matrix and fragments thereof. Although tissue structure until recently was viewed as a simple architecture anchoring cells and proteins, this complex grid may contain essential information enabling the maintenance of the structure and normal functioning of tissue. The aims of this review are to (1) discuss the structural components of the matrix and the relevance of their mutations to the pathology of diseases such as fibrosis and cancer, (2) introduce the possibility that post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as protease cleavage, citrullination, cross-linking, nitrosylation, glycosylation, and isomerization, generated during pathology, may be unique, disease-specific biochemical markers, (3) list and review the range of simple enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) that have been developed for assessing the extracellular matrix (ECM) and detecting abnormal ECM remodeling, and (4) discuss whether some PTMs are the cause or consequence of disease. New evidence clearly suggests that the ECM at some point in the pathogenesis becomes a driver of disease. These pathological modified ECM proteins may allow insights into complicated pathologies in which the end stage is excessive tissue remodeling, and provide unique and more pathology-specific biochemical markers.<newchar><newabs>21917992<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) serves diverse functions and is a major component of the cellular microenvironment. The ECM is a highly dynamic structure, constantly undergoing a remodeling process where ECM components are deposited, degraded, or otherwise modified. ECM dynamics are indispensible during restructuring of tissue architecture. ECM remodeling is an important mechanism whereby cell differentiation can be regulated, including processes such as the establishment and maintenance of stem cell niches, branching morphogenesis, angiogenesis, bone remodeling, and wound repair. In contrast, abnormal ECM dynamics lead to deregulated cell proliferation and invasion, failure of cell death, and loss of cell differentiation, resulting in congenital defects and pathological processes including tissue fibrosis and cancer. Understanding the mechanisms of ECM remodeling and its regulation, therefore, is essential for developing new therapeutic interventions for diseases and novel strategies for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.<newchar><newabs>22943504<newchar>Fibroblasts comprise the largest cell population in the myocardium. In heart disease, the number of fibroblasts is increased either by replication of the resident myocardial fibroblasts, migration and transformation of circulating bone marrow cells, or by transformation of endothelial/epithelial cells into fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. The primary function of fibroblasts is to produce structural proteins that comprise the extracellular matrix (ECM). This can be a constructive process; however, hyperactivity of cardiac fibroblasts can result in excess production and deposition of ECM proteins in the myocardium, known as fibrosis, with adverse effects on cardiac structure and function. In addition to being the primary source of ECM proteins, fibroblasts produce a number of cytokines, peptides, and enzymes among which matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), directly impact the ECM turnover and homeostasis. Function of fibroblasts can also in turn be regulated by MMPs and TIMPs. In this review article, we will focus on the function of cardiac fibroblasts in the context of ECM formation, homeostasis and remodeling in the heart. We will discuss the origins and multiple roles of cardiac fibroblasts in myocardial remodeling in different types of heart disease in patients and in animal models. We will further provide an overview of what we have learned from experimental animal models and genetically modified mice with altered expression of ECM regulatory proteins, MMPs and TIMPs.<newchar><newabs>24159376<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is the hallmark of hypertensive nephropathy. Uncontrolled proteolytic activity due to an imbalance between matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (MMPs/TIMPs) has been implicated in renovascular fibrosis. We hypothesized that inhibition of MMPs will reduce excess ECM deposition and modulate autophagy to attenuate hypertension. Dahl-salt sensitive (Dahl/SS) and Lewis rats were fed on high salt diet and treated without or with 1.2 mg/kg b.w. of GM6001 (MMP inhibitor) by intra-peritoneal injection on alternate days for 4 weeks. Blood pressure, renal cortical blood flow, vascular density, collagen, elastin and MMPs/TIMPs were measured. GM6001 treatment significantly reduced mean blood pressure in hypertensive Dahl/SS rats. Renal resistive index was increased in hypertensive Dahl/SS rats and Doppler flowmetry showed reduced cortical perfusion. Barium angiography demonstrated a reduction in terminal branches of renal vasculature. Inhibition of MMPs by GM6001 resulted in a significant improvement in all the parameters including renal function. In hypertensive Dahl/SS rats, protein levels of MMP-9, -2 and -13 were increased including the activity of MMP-9 and -2; TIMP-1 and -2 levels were increased whereas, TIMP-3 levels were similar to Lewis controls. Administration of GM6001 reduced the activity of MMPs and increased the levels of TIMP-1, -2 and -3. MMP inhibition reduced type -1 collagen deposition and increased elastin in the intra-renal vessels indicating reduced fibrosis. Autophagy markers were decreased in hypertensive Dahl/SS rats and GM6001 treatment enhanced their levels. We conclude that MMP inhibition (GM6001) reduces adverse renovascular remodeling in hypertension by modulating ECM turnover and stimulating autophagy.<newchar>Dahl-salt sensitive<n-term>autophagy<n-term>collagen<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>vascular density<n-term><newabs>23624915<newchar>EGFR overexpression and chromosome 3p deletion are two frequent events in head and neck cancers. We previously mapped the smallest region of recurrent copy-number loss at 3p12.2-p14.1. LRIG1, a negative regulator of EGFR, was found at 3p14, and its copy-number loss correlated with poor clinical outcome. Inducible expression of LRIG1 in head and neck cancer TW01 cells, a line with low LRIG1 levels, suppressed cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. Gene expression profiling, quantitative RT-PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and western blot analysis demonstrated that LRIG1 modulated extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and EGFR-MAPK-SPHK1 transduction pathway by suppressing expression of EGFR ligands/activators, MMPs and SPHK1. In addition, LRIG1 induction triggered cell morphology changes and integrin inactivation, which coupled with reduced SNAI2 expression. By contrast, knockdown of endogenous LRIG1 in TW06 cells, a line with normal LRIG1 levels, significantly enhanced cell proliferation, migration and invasiveness. Such tumor-promoting effects could be abolished by specific MAPK or SPHK1 inhibitors. Our data suggest LRIG1 as a tumor suppressor for head and neck cancers; LRIG1 downregulation in cancer cells enhances EGFR-MAPK-SPHK1 signaling and ECM remodeling activity, leading to malignant phenotypes of head and neck cancers.<newchar><newabs>25390353<newchar>The hallmarks of calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) are the significant quantitative and qualitative changes that occur in the extracellular matrix (ECM), which ultimately lead to increased leaflet stiffness and obstruction of left ventricular outflow. Mounting evidence suggests that ECM remodeling not only contribute to valve cell dysfunction but also alter certain cell signaling pathways responsible for the initiation and progression of the disease state. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), collectively called matrixins, are a family of enzymes known to participate in numerous ECM remodeling events during embryonic development and in disease. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether changes in MMP-9 expression might be involved in the pathophysiology of CAVD. For this purpose, we have analyzed a total of 19 pathologic valves from patients who underwent aortic valve replacement for calcific aortic stenosis. Microscopically, the cusp tissue showed diffuse fibrosis, neovascularization, and abnormal ECM remodeling with collagen disorganization and mineralization. Western blot and immunohistochemical analyses have been performed on both the areas overlying and remote from the mineral deposits. Protein expression data evidenced a significant upregulation of MMP-9 in the calcified lesion area. Consistent with these observations, immunohistochemistry demonstrated that MMP-9 protein was almost exclusively localized near or around the mineralized nodules, whereas was generally quite weak or absent in areas devoid of any calcification. Our data suggest that MMP-9 may play a key role in CAVD probably by promoting the fibrotic and procalcific remodeling of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>25003237<newchar>Widespread skeletal muscle degeneration and impaired regeneration lead to progressive muscle weakness and premature death in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Dystrophic muscles are progressively replaced by nonfunctional tissue because of exhaustion of muscle precursor cells and excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are components of the ECM and are increasingly implicated in the regulation of biologic processes, but their possible role in the progression of DMD pathology is not understood. In the present study, we performed immunohistochemical and biochemical analyses of endogenous GAGs in skeletal muscle biopsies of 10 DMD patients and 11 healthy individuals (controls). Immunostaining targeted to specific GAG species showed greater deposition of chondroitin sulfate (CS)/dermatan (DS) sulfate in DMD patient biopsies versus control biopsies. The selective accumulation of CS/DS in DMD biopsies was confirmed by biochemical quantification assay. In addition, high-performance liquid chromatography analysis demonstrated a modification of the sulfation pattern of CS/DS disaccharide units in DMD muscles. In conclusion, our data open up a new path of investigation and suggest that GAGs could represent a new and original therapeutic target for improving the success of gene or cell therapy for the treatment of muscular dystrophies.<newchar><newabs>24375265<newchar>The in vitro growth of ovarian follicles is an emerging technology for fertility preservation. Various strategies support the culture of secondary and multilayer follicles from various species including mice, non-human primate, and human; however, the culture of early stage (primary and primordial) follicles, which are more abundant in the ovary and survive cryopreservation, has been limited. Hydrogel-encapsulating follicle culture systems that employed feeder cells, such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), stimulated the growth of primary follicles (70-80 µm); yet, survival was low and smaller follicles (&lt;70 µm) rapidly lost structure and degenerated. These morphologic changes were associated with a breakdown of the follicular basement membrane; hence, this study investigated ascorbic acid based on its role in extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition/remodeling for other applications. The selection of ascorbic acid was further supported by a microarray analysis that suggested a decrease in mRNA levels of enzymes within the ascorbate pathway between primordial, primary, and secondary follicles. The supplementation of ascorbic acid (50 µg/mL) significantly enhanced the survival of primary follicles (&lt;80 µm) cultured in alginate hydrogels, which coincided with improved structural integrity. Follicles developed antral cavities and increased to diameters exceeding 250 µm. Consistent with improved structural integrity, the gene/protein expression of ECM and cell adhesion molecules was significantly changed. This research supports the notion that modifying the culture environment (medium components) can substantially enhance the survival and growth of early stage follicles.<newchar>alginate hydrogel<n-term>ascorbic acid<n-term>biomaterial<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>ovarian follicle development<n-term>primary follicle<n-term>regenerative medicine<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term><newabs>23275309<newchar>A single instillation of porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE) results in significant airspace enlargement on the 28th day after instillation, whereas cigarette smoke (CS) exposure requires 6 months to produce mild emphysema in rodents. Considering that there are differences in the pathogenesis of parenchymal destruction in these different experimental models, it is likely that there may be different patterns of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. To evaluate ECM remodeling, C57BL/6 mice were submitted to either a nasal drop of PPE (PPE 28 Days) or exposed for 6 months to cigarette smoke (CS 6 months). Control groups received either an intranasal instillation of saline solution (Saline 28 Days) or remained without any smoke inhalation for six months (Control 6 months). We measured the mean linear intercept and the volume proportion of collagen type I, collagen type III, elastin and fibrillin. We used emission-scanning confocal microscopy to verify the fiber distribution. Both models induced increased mean linear intercept in relation to the respective controls, being larger in the elastase model in relation to the CS model. In the CS model, emphysema was associated with an increase in the volume proportion of fibrillin, whereas in the PPE model there was an increase in the parenchymal elastin content. In both models, there was an increase in collagen type III, which was higher in the CS-exposed mice. We concluded that ECM remodeling is different in the two most used experimental models of emphysema.<newchar><newabs>23303680<newchar>Reorganization of myometrial extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for the uterus to achieve powerful synchronous contractions during labor. Remodeling of the ECM has been implicated in membrane rupture and cervical ripening. Because maternal obesity is associated with both delivery disorders and elevated circulating leptin levels, this study aimed to assess the ability of leptin to interfere with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced myometrial ECM remodeling. Myometrial biopsy samples were obtained from women undergoing cesarean delivery before labor onset. Myometrial explants were incubated for 48 h with LPS and leptin. LPS challenge was associated with a marked decrease in collagen content and in heat shock protein (HSP) 47 expression, reflecting a disruption in collagen synthesis and an increase in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 and MMP9 activity and in MMP2, MMP9, and MMP13 expression. Leptin prevented an LPS-induced decrease in myometrial collagen content in a concentration-dependent manner. This effect was associated with an increase in HSP47 expression and a decrease in MMP2 and MMP9 activity and expression. These results show that leptin prevents LPS-induced myometrial remodeling through collagen synthesis stimulation and inhibition of MMP2 and MMP9. Our study strengthens the hypothesis that leptin plays a role in the development of obesity-related delivery disorders.<newchar><newabs>23917802<newchar>Aging is a complex physiological process that poses considerable conundrums to rapidly aging societies. For example, the risk of dying from cardiovascular diseases and/or cancer steadily declines for people after their 60s, and other causes of death predominate for seniors older than 80 years of age. Thus, physiological aging presents numerous unanswered questions, particularly with regard to changing metabolic patterns. Urine proteomics analysis is becoming a non-invasive and reproducible diagnostic method. We investigated the urine proteomes in healthy elderly people to determine which metabolic processes were weakened or strengthened in aging humans. Urine samples from 37 healthy volunteers aged 19-90 years (19 men, 18 women) were analyzed for protein expression by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This generated a list of 19 proteins that were differentially expressed in different age groups (young, intermediate, and old age). In particular, the oldest group showed protein changes reflective of altered extracellular matrix turnover and declining immune function, in which changes corresponded to reported changes in cardiovascular tissue remodeling and immune disorders in the elderly. Thus, urinary proteome changes in the elderly appear to reflect the physiological processes of aging and are particularly clearly represented in the circulatory and immune systems. Detailed identification of &quot;protein trails&quot; creates a more global picture of metabolic changes that occur in the elderly.<newchar><newabs>26799466<newchar>Three-dimensional (3D) printing is considered an ideally suitable method to fabricate patient specific implantable devices. The approach enabled to produce a porous scaffold with tailored physical, mechanical, and biological properties because of the flexibility to tune the scaffold architecture. The objective of the study described was to elucidate the determining role of cell-laid extracellular matrix (ECM) in impacting biological response. In this regard, to mimic the natural ECM environment or the attributes of the native tissue, a natural ECM analogue surface was produced on the 3D printed and sintered hydroxyapatite (HA) scaffold surface by the mineralized ECM of the osteoblast. This involved the growth of osteoblast on 3D printed scaffolds, followed by differentiation to deposit the mineralized ECM on the biomaterial surface. The cells were removed from the mineralized matrix using freeze-thaw cycles to obtain a decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) on the biomaterial surface. Subsequently, seeding of osteoblast on dECM-ornamented HA scaffolds led to 3D growth with enhanced expression of prominent proteins, actin and vinculin. Based on preliminary observations of present study, it was underscored that HA scaffolds-ornamented with dECM provided an optimized microenvironment conducive to the growth of 3D structural tissue and favorably promoted biological functionality because of the availability of an environment that promoted cell-cell and cell-scaffold interaction. The primary advantage of dECM is that it enabled constructive remodeling and promoted the formation of tissue in lieu of less functional tissue. The study opens-up a new path for printing of 3D structures suitable to treat segmental bone defects. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part A: 104A: 1343-1351, 2016.<newchar>3D printing<n-term>ECM<n-term>additive manufacturing<n-term>cytocompatibility<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term><newabs>20980442<newchar>Cells of the mammary gland are in intimate contact with other cells and with the extracellular matrix (ECM), both of which provide not only a biochemical context, but a mechanical context as well. Cell-mediated contraction allows cells to sense the stiffness of their microenvironment, and respond with appropriate mechanosignaling events that regulate gene expression and differentiation. ECM composition and organization are tightly regulated throughout development of the mammary gland, resulting in corresponding regulation of the mechanical environment and proper tissue architecture. Mechanical regulation is also at play during breast carcinoma progression, as changes in ECM deposition, composition, and organization accompany breast carcinoma. These changes result in stiffer matrices that activate mechanosignaling pathways and thereby induce cell proliferation, facilitate local tumor cell invasion, and promote progression. Thus, understanding the role of forces in the mammary gland is crucial to understanding both normal developmental and pathological processes.<newchar><newabs>26963743<newchar>Adverse remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a significant characteristic of heart failure. Reverse remodeling of the fibrillar ECM secondary to mechanical unloading of the left ventricle (LV) by left ventricular assist device (LVAD) has been subject of intense investigation; however, little is known about the impacts on nonfibrillar ECM and matricellular proteins that also contribute to disease progression. Explanted failing hearts were procured from patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with or without LVAD support, and compared to nonfailing control hearts. LV free wall specimens were formalin-fixed, flash-frozen or optimum cutting temperature-mount frozen. Histologic and biochemical assessment of fibrillar ECM showed that LVAD support was associated with lower levels of insoluble collagen, collagen type I mRNA, and collagen I/III ratio compared with no-LVAD hearts. A disintegrin and Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin Motifs-2 (ADAM-TS2), a procollagen endopeptidase, was reduced in no-LVAD but not in LVAD hearts. The rise in ECM proteolytic activities was significantly lower in LVAD hearts. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP1, MMP2, MMP8, MMP13, and MT1-MMP/MMP14) were comparable between DCM hearts. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)3 and TIMP4 messenger RNA and protein showed the greatest reduction in no-LVAD hearts. Basement membrane proteins exhibited less severe disarray of laminin and fibronectin-1 in LVAD-supported hearts. The rise in matricellular protein, osteopontin, was suppressed in LVAD hearts, whereas secreted protein, acidic, cysteine-rich (SPARC) levels was unaffected by LVAD. Mechanical unloading of the failing DCM hearts can restore the fibrillar ECM and the basement membrane, contributing toward improved clinical outcomes. However, persistent elevation of matricellular proteins such as SPARC could contribute to the relapse of failing hearts on removal of LVAD support.<newchar><newabs>26200932<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) has emerged as a dynamic tissue component, providing not only structural support, but also functionally participating in a wide range of signaling events during development, injury, and disease remodeling. Investigation of dynamic changes in cardiac ECM proteome is challenging due to the relative insolubility of ECM proteins, which results from their macromolecular nature, extensive post-translational modification (PTM), and tendency to form protein complexes. Finally, the relative abundance of cellular and mitochondrial proteins in cardiac tissue further complicates cardiac ECM proteomic approaches. Recent developments of various techniques to enrich and analyze ECM proteins are playing a major role in overcoming these challenges. Application of cardiac ECM proteomics in disease tissues can further provide spatial and temporal information relevant to disease diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, and engineering of therapeutic candidates for cardiac repair and regeneration.<newchar>Cardiac diseases<n-term>Decellularization<n-term>Extracellular matrix biomarker<n-term>Extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>Extracellular proteomics<n-term><newabs>26192009<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) have been used to facilitate repair or remodeling of numerous tissues, including the esophagus. The theoretically ideal scaffold for tissue repair is the ECM derived from the particular tissue to be treated, that is, site-specific or homologous ECM. The preference or potential advantage for the use of site-specific ECM remains unknown in the esophageal location. The objective of the present study was to characterize the in vitro cellular response and in vivo host response to a homologous esophageal ECM (eECM) versus nonhomologous ECMs derived from small intestinal submucosa and urinary bladder. The in vitro response of esophageal stem cells was characterized by migration, proliferation, and three-dimensional (3D) organoid formation assays. The in vivo remodeling response was evaluated in a rat model of esophageal mucosal resection. Results of the study showed that the eECM retains favorable tissue-specific characteristics that enhance the migration of esophageal stem cells and supports the formation of 3D organoids to a greater extent than heterologous ECMs. Implantation of eECM facilitates the remodeling of esophageal mucosa following mucosal resection, but no distinct advantage versus heterologous ECM could be identified.<newchar><newabs>22982346<newchar>The heart possesses a regeneration potential derived from endogenous and exogenous stem and progenitor cell populations, though baseline regeneration appears to be sub-therapeutic. This limitation was initially attributed to a lack of cells with cardiomyogenic potential following an insult to the myocardium. Rather, recent studies demonstrate increased numbers of cardiomyocyte progenitor cells in diseased hearts. Given that the limiting factor does not appear to be cell quantity but rather repletion of functional cardiomyocytes, it is crucial to understand potential mechanisms inhibiting progenitor cell differentiation. One of the extensively studied areas in heart disease is extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, with both the composition and mechanical properties of the ECM undergoing changes in diseased hearts. This review explores the influence of ECM properties on cardiomyogenesis and adult cardiac progenitor cells.<newchar><newabs>26441540<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is known to play important roles in regulating neuronal recovery from injury. The ECM can also impact physiological synaptic plasticity, although this process is less well understood. To understand the impact of the ECM on synaptic function and remodeling in vivo, we examined ECM composition and proteolysis in a well-established model of experience-dependent plasticity in the visual cortex. We describe a rapid change in ECM protein composition during Ocular Dominance Plasticity (ODP) in adolescent mice, and a loss of ECM remodeling in mice that lack the extracellular protease, matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9). Loss of MMP9 also attenuated functional ODP following monocular deprivation (MD) and reduced excitatory synapse density and spine density in sensory cortex. While we observed no change in the morphology of existing dendritic spines, spine dynamics were altered, and MMP9 knock-out (KO) mice showed increased turnover of dendritic spines over a period of 2 days. We also analyzed the effects of MMP9 loss on microglia, as these cells are involved in extracellular remodeling and have been recently shown to be important for synaptic plasticity. MMP9 KO mice exhibited very limited changes in microglial morphology. Ultrastructural analysis, however, showed that the extracellular space surrounding microglia was increased, with concomitant increases in microglial inclusions, suggesting possible changes in microglial function in the absence of MMP9. Taken together, our results show that MMP9 contributes to ECM degradation, synaptic dynamics and sensory-evoked plasticity in the mouse visual cortex.<newchar>dendrite<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9)<n-term>ocular dominance<n-term>plasticity<n-term>primary sensory cortex (S1)<n-term>primary visual cortex (V1)<n-term>spine<n-term><newabs>24029944<newchar>Myocardial infarction (MI) is a leading cause of death worldwide. Permanent ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) is a commonly used surgical model to study post-MI effects in mice. LAD occlusion induces a robust wound healing response that includes extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. This chapter provides a detailed guide on the surgical procedure to permanently ligate the LAD. Additionally, we describe a prototype method to enrich cardiac tissue for ECM, which allows one to focus on ECM remodeling in the left ventricle following surgically induced MI in mice.<newchar><newabs>25830832<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is a tissue-specific macromolecular structure that provides physical support to tissues and is essential for normal organ function. In the lung, ECM plays an active role in shaping cell behavior both in health and disease by virtue of the contextual clues it imparts to cells. Qualities including dimensionality, molecular composition, and intrinsic stiffness all promote normal function of the lung ECM. Alterations in composition and/or modulation of stiffness of the focally injured or diseased lung ECM microenvironment plays a part in reparative processes performed by fibroblasts. Under conditions of remodeling or in disease states, inhomogeneous stiffening (or softening) of the pathologic ECM may both precede modifications in cell behavior and be a result of disease progression. The ability of ECM to stimulate further ECM production by fibroblasts and drive disease progression has potentially significant implications for mesenchymal stromal cell-based therapies; in the setting of pathologic ECM stiffness or composition, the therapeutic intent of progenitor cells may be subverted. Taken together, current data suggest that lung ECM actively contributes to health and disease; thus, mediators of cell-ECM signaling or factors that influence ECM stiffness may represent viable therapeutic targets in many lung disorders.<newchar>cell shape<n-term>cellular mechanotransduction<n-term>disease progression<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibroblasts<n-term><newabs>23935989<newchar>Fibrosis is characterized by excessive accumulation of scar tissue as a result of exaggerated deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), leading to tissue contraction and impaired function of the organ. Fibronectin (Fn) is an essential component of the ECM, and plays an important role in fibrosis. One such fibrotic pathology is that of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), a sight-threatening complication which develops as a consequence of failure of surgical repair of retinal detachment. Such patients often require repeated surgeries for retinal re-attachment; therefore, a preventive measure for PVR is of utmost importance. The contractile membranes formed in PVR, are composed of various cell types including the retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE); fibronectin is an important constituent of the ECM surrounding these cells. Together with the vitreous, fibronectin creates microenvironments in which RPE cells proliferate. We have successfully developed a dual-action, fully human, fibronectin-specific single chain variable fragment antibody (scFv) termed Fn52RGDS, which acts in two ways: i) binds to cryptic sites in fibronectin, and thereby prevents its self polymerization/fibrillogenesis, and ii) interacts with the cell surface receptors, ie., integrins (through an attached &quot;RGD&quot; sequence tag), and thereby blocks the downstream cell signaling events. We demonstrate the ability of this antibody to effectively reduce some of the hallmark features of fibrosis--migration, adhesion, fibronectin polymerization, matrix metalloprotease (MMP) expression, as well as reduction of collagen gel contraction (a model of fibrotic tissue remodeling). The data suggests that the antibody can be used as a rational, novel anti-fibrotic candidate.<newchar><newabs>24982443<newchar>The fibronectin matrix plays a crucial role in the regulation of angiogenesis during development, tissue repair and pathogenesis. Previous work has identified a fibronectin-derived homophilic binding peptide, anastellin, as an effective inhibitor of angiogenesis; however, its mechanism of action is not well understood. In the present study, we demonstrate that anastellin selectively inhibits microvessel cell signaling in response to the VEGF165 isoform, but not VEGF121, by preventing the assembly of the complex containing the VEGF receptor and neuropilin-1. Anastellin treatment resulted in the inactivation of α5β1 integrins but was not accompanied by a change in either adhesion complexes or adhesion-based signaling. Integrin inactivation was associated with a masking of the fibronectin synergy site within the extracellular matrix (ECM), indicating that α5β1 inactivation resulted from a decrease in available ligand. These data demonstrate that anastellin influences the microvessel cell response to growth factors by controlling the repertoire of ligated integrins and point to anastellin as an effective regulator of fibronectin matrix organization. These studies further suggest that homophilic fibronectin binding peptides might have novel applications in the field of tissue regeneration as tools to regulate neovascularization.<newchar>Anastellin<n-term>Angiogenesis<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Neuropilin<n-term>VEGF<n-term><newabs>22265892<newchar>Aortic valve disease (AVD) occurs in 2.5% of the general population and often requires surgical intervention. Aortic valve malformation (AVM) underlies the majority of cases, suggesting a developmental etiology. Elastin haploinsufficiency results in complex cardiovascular problems, and 20-45% of patients have AVM and/or AVD. Elastin insufficient (Eln+/-) mice demonstrate AVM and latent AVD due to abnormalities in the valve annulus region. The objective of this study was to examine extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and biomechanical properties in regional aortic valve tissue and determine the impact of early AVM on late AVD in the Eln+/- mouse model. Aortic valve ECM composition and remodeling from juvenile, adult, and aged stages were evaluated in Eln+/- mice using histology, ELISA, immunohistochemistry and gelatin zymography. Aortic valve tissue biomechanical properties were determined using micropipette aspiration. Cartilage-like nodules were demonstrated within the valve annulus region at all stages identifying a developmental abnormality preceding AVD. Interestingly, maladaptive ECM remodeling was observed in early AVM without AVD and worsened with late AVD, as evidenced by increased MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression and activity, as well as abnormalities in ADAMTS-mediated versican processing. Cleaved versican was increased in the valve annulus region of aged Eln+/- mice, and this abnormality correlated temporally with adverse alterations in valve tissue biomechanical properties and the manifestation of AVD. These findings identify maladaptive ECM remodeling in functional AVM as an early disease process with a progressive natural history, similar to that seen in human AVD, emphasizing the importance of the annulus region in pathogenesis. Combining molecular and engineering approaches provides complementary mechanistic insights that may be informative in the search for new therapeutic targets and durable valve bioprostheses.<newchar><newabs>22386719<newchar>Dogs with experimental mitral regurgitation (MR) provide insights into the left ventricular remodeling in preclinical MR. The early preclinical left ventricular (LV) changes after mitral regurgitation represent progressive dysfunctional remodeling, in that no compensatory response returns the functional stroke volume (SV) to normal even as total SV increases. The gradual disease progression leads to mitral annulus stretch and enlargement of the regurgitant orifice, further increasing the regurgitant volume. Remodeling with loss of collagen weave and extracellular matrix (ECM) is accompanied by stretching and hypertrophy of the cross-sectional area and length of the cardiomyocyte. Isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes demonstrate dysfunction based on decreased cell shortening and reduced intracellular calcium transients before chamber enlargement or decreases in contractility in the whole heart can be clinically appreciated. The genetic response to increased end-diastolic pressure is down-regulation of genes associated with support of the collagen and ECM and up-regulation of genes associated with matrix remodeling. Experiments have not demonstrated any beneficial effects on remodeling from treatments that decrease afterload via blocking the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). Beta-1 receptor blockade and chymase inhibition have altered the progression of the LV remodeling and have supported cardiomyocyte function. The geometry of the LV during the remodeling provides insight into the importance of regional differences in responses to wall stress.<newchar><newabs>21324931<newchar>Dynamic remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for development, wound healing and normal organ homeostasis. Life-threatening pathological conditions arise when ECM remodeling becomes excessive or uncontrolled. In this Perspective, we focus on how ECM remodeling contributes to fibrotic diseases and cancer, which both present challenging obstacles with respect to clinical treatment, to illustrate the importance and complexity of cell-ECM interactions in the pathogenesis of these conditions. Fibrotic diseases, which include pulmonary fibrosis, systemic sclerosis, liver cirrhosis and cardiovascular disease, account for over 45% of deaths in the developed world. ECM remodeling is also crucial for tumor malignancy and metastatic progression, which ultimately cause over 90% of deaths from cancer. Here, we discuss current methodologies and models for understanding and quantifying the impact of environmental cues provided by the ECM on disease progression, and how improving our understanding of ECM remodeling in these pathological conditions is crucial for uncovering novel therapeutic targets and treatment strategies. This can only be achieved through the use of appropriate in vitro and in vivo models to mimic disease, and with technologies that enable accurate monitoring, imaging and quantification of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>20708001<newchar>The purpose of this review is to examine the literature in an attempt to elucidate a biomechanical basis for glaucomatous cupping. In particular, this work focuses on the role of biomechanics in driving connective tissue remodeling in the progression of laminar morphology from a normal state to that of an excavated glaucomatous state. While there are multiple contributing factors to the pathogenesis of glaucoma, we focus on laminar extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in glaucoma and the feedback mechanisms and signals that may guide progressive laminar cupping. We review the literature on the potential mechanisms of glaucomatous changes in the laminar ECM at the anatomic, structural, cellular and subcellular levels in the context of the biomechanical paradigm of glaucomatous onset and progression. Several conclusions can be drawn from this review. First, extensive remodeling of the lamina cribrosa ECM occurs in primary open angle glaucoma. Second, there is surprisingly little evidence to support acute mechanical damage to the lamina as the principal mechanism of cupping. Third, ONH astrocytes and lamina cribrosa cells can sense their mechanical environment and respond to mechanical stimuli by remodeling the ECM. Fourth, there is evidence suggesting that chronic remodeling of the lamina results in a progressive posterior migration of the laminar insertion into the canal wall, which eventually results in the posterior lamina inserting into the pia mater. Finally, modeling studies suggest that laminar remodeling may be a biomechanical feedback mechanism through which cells modify their environment in an attempt to return to a homeostatic mechanical environment. It is plausible that biomechanics-driven connective tissue remodeling is a mechanism in the progression of laminar morphology from a normal state to that of a cupped, excavated glaucomatous state.<newchar><newabs>22516365<newchar>The incidence of heart failure (HF) increases with age. This study sought to determine whether aging exacerbates structural and functional remodeling of the myocardium in HF. HF was induced in young (~18 months) and aged sheep (&gt;8 years) by right ventricular tachypacing. In non-paced animals, aging was associated with increased left ventricular (LV) end diastolic internal dimensions (EDID, P&lt;0.001), reduced fractional shortening (P&lt;0.01) and an increase in myocardial collagen content (P&lt;0.01). HF increased EDID and reduced fractional shortening in both young and aged animals, although these changes were more pronounced in the aged (P&lt;0.05). Age-associated differences in cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling occurred in HF with collagen accumulation in young HF (P&lt;0.001) and depletion in aged HF (P&lt;0.05). MMP-2 activity increased in the aged control and young HF groups (P&lt;0.05). Reduced tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) expression (TIMPs 3 and 4, P&lt;0.05) was present only in the aged HF group. Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was increased in aged hearts compared to young controls (P&lt;0.05) while serum procollagen type I C-pro peptide (PICP) was increased in both young failing (P&lt;0.05) and aged failing (P&lt;0.01) animals. In conclusion, collagen content of the cardiac ECM changes in both aging and HF although; whether collagen accumulation or depletion occurs depends on age. Changes in TIMP expression in aged failing hearts alongside augmented collagen synthesis in HF provide a potential mechanism for the age-dependent ECM remodeling. Aging should therefore be considered an important factor when elucidating cardiac disease mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>25332161<newchar>Integrin-mediated force application induces a conformational change in latent TGF-β1 that leads to the release of the active form of the growth factor from the extracellular matrix (ECM). Mechanical activation of TGF-β1 is currently understood as an acute process that depends on the contractile force of cells. However, we show that ECM remodeling, preceding the activation step, mechanically primes latent TGF-β1 akin to loading a mechanical spring. Cell-based assays and unique strain devices were used to produce a cell-derived ECM of controlled organization and prestrain. Mechanically conditioned ECM served as a substrate to measure the efficacy of TGF-β1 activation after cell contraction or direct force application using magnetic microbeads. The release of active TGF-β1 was always higher from prestrained ECM as compared with unorganized and/or relaxed ECM. The finding that ECM prestrain regulates the bioavailability of TGF-β1 is important to understand the context of diseases that involve excessive ECM remodeling, such as fibrosis or cancer.<newchar><newabs>22166681<newchar>Macrophages have been classified as having plastic phenotypes which exist along a spectrum between M1 (classically activated; pro-inflammatory) and M2 (alternatively activated; regulatory, homeostatic). To date, the effects of polarization towards an M1 or M2 phenotype have been studied largely in the context of response to pathogen or cancer. Recently, M1 and M2 macrophages have been shown to play distinct roles in tissue remodeling following injury. In the present study, the M1/M2 paradigm was utilized to examine the role of macrophages in the remodeling process following implantation of 14 biologically derived surgical mesh materials in the rat abdominal wall. In situ polarization of macrophages responding to the materials was examined and correlated to a quantitative measure of the observed tissue remodeling response to determine whether macrophage polarization is an accurate predictor of the ability of a biologic scaffold to promote constructive tissue remodeling. Additionally the ability of M1 and M2 macrophages to differentially recruit progenitor-like cells in vitro, which are commonly observed to participate in the remodeling of those ECM scaffolds which have a positive clinical outcome, was examined as a possible mechanism underlying the differences in the observed remodeling responses. The results of the present study show that there is a strong correlation between the early macrophage response to implanted materials and the outcome of tissue remodeling. Increased numbers of M2 macrophages and higher ratios of M2:M1 macrophages within the site of remodeling at 14 days were associated with more positive remodeling outcomes (r(2)=0.525-0.686, p&lt;0.05). Further, the results of the present study suggest that the constructive remodeling outcome may be due to the recruitment and survival of different cell populations to the sites of remodeling associated with materials that elicit an M1 vs. M2 response. Both M2 and M0 macrophage conditioned media were shown to have higher chemotactic activities than media conditioned by M1 macrophages (p&lt;0.05). A more thorough understanding of these issues will logically influence the design of next generation biomaterials and the development of regenerative medicine strategies for the formation of functional host tissues.<newchar><newabs>24919815<newchar>Metastasis remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality from solid tumors. Lack of comprehensive systems to study the progression of metastasis contributes to the low success of treatment. We developed a novel three-dimensional in vitro reconstructed metastasis (rMet) model that incorporates extracellular matrix (ECM) elements characteristic of the primary (breast, prostate, or lung) and metastatic (bone marrow, BM) sites. A cytokine-rich liquid interphase separates the primary and distant sites, further recapitulating circulation. Similar to main events underlying the metastatic cascade, the rMet model fractionated human tumor cell lines into sub-populations with distinct invasive and migratory abilities: (i) a primary tumor-like fraction mainly consisting of non-migratory spheroids; (ii) an invasive fraction that invaded through the primary tumor ECM, but failed to acquire anchorage-independence and reach the BM; and (iii) a highly migratory BM-colonizing population that invaded the primary ECM, survived in the &quot;circulation-like&quot; media, and successfully invaded and proliferated within BM ECM. BM-colonizing fractions successfully established metastatic bone lesions in vivo, whereas the tumor-like spheroids failed to engraft the bones, showing the ability of the rMet model to faithfully select for highly aggressive sub-populations with a propensity to colonize a metastatic site. By applying the rMet model to study real-time ECM remodeling, we show that tumor cells secrete collagenolytic enzymes for invading the primary site ECM but not for entering the BM ECM, indicating possible differences in ECM remodeling mechanisms at primary tumor versus metastatic sites.<newchar>Breast cancer<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>Solid tumors<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>24341855<newchar>A biocompatible hydrogel consisting of extracellular matrix (ECM) from human tendons is described as a potential scaffold for guided tissue regeneration and tissue engineering purposes. Lyophilized decellularized tendons were milled and enzymatically digested to form an ECM solution. The ECM solution properties are assessed by proteome analysis with mass spectrometry, and the material's rheological properties are determined as a function of frequency, temperature, and time. In vivo application of the gel in a rat model is assessed for remodeling and host cell repopulation. Histology for macrophage invasion, fibroblast repopulation, and nanoscale properties of the gel is assessed. Gel interaction with multipotent adipoderived stem cells (ASCs) is also addressed in vitro to assess possible cytotoxicity and its ability to act as a delivery vehicle for cells. Proteome analysis of the ECM-solution and gel mass spectroscopy identified the most abundant 150 proteins, of which two isoforms of collagen I represented more than 55% of the sample. Rheology showed that storage (G') and loss (G″) of the ECM solution were stable at room temperature but displayed sigmoidal increases after ∼15 min at 37°C, matching macroscopic observations of its thermo responsiveness. G' and G″ of the gel at 1 rad/s were 213.1±19.9 and 27.1±2.4 Pa, respectively. Electron microscopy revealed fiber alignment and good structural porosity in the gel, as well as invasion of cells in vivo. Histology also showed early CD68(+) macrophage invasion throughout the gel, followed by increasing numbers of fibroblast cells. ASCs mixed with the gel in vitro proliferated, indicating good biocompatibility. This ECM solution can be delivered percutaneously into a zone of tendon injury. After injection, the thermoresponsive behavior of the ECM solution allows it to polymerize and form a porous gel at body temperature. A supportive nanostructure of collagen fibers is established that conforms to the three-dimensional space of the defect. This hydrogel holds the distinctive composition specific for tendon ECM, where tissue-specific cues facilitate host cell infiltration and remodeling. The results presented indicate that injectable ECM materials from tendon may offer a promising alternative in the treatment of tendinopathies and acute tendon injuries.<newchar><newabs>22575834<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of mammalian extracellular matrix (ECM) are routinely used for the repair and reconstruction of injured or missing tissues in a variety of pre-clinical and clinical applications. However, the structural and functional outcomes have varied considerably. An important variable of xenogeneic biologic scaffolds is the age of the animal from which the ECM is derived. The present study compared the in vivo host response and remodeling outcomes of biologic scaffolds composed of small intestinal submucosa (SIS)-ECM harvested from pigs that differed only in age. Results showed that there are distinct differences in the remodeling characteristics as a consequence of source animal age. Scaffolds derived from younger animals were associated with a more constructive, site appropriate, tissue remodeling response than scaffolds derived from older animals. Furthermore, the constructive remodeling response was associated with a dominant M2 macrophage response.<newchar><newabs>24291155<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a meshwork of both structural and functional proteins assembled in unique tissue-specific architectures. The ECM both provides the mechanical framework for each tissue and organ and is a substrate for cell signaling. The ECM is highly dynamic, and cells both receive signals from the ECM and contribute to its content and organization. This process of &quot;dynamic reciprocity&quot; is key to tissue development and for homeostasis. Based upon these important functions, ECM-based materials have been used in a wide variety of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine approaches to tissue reconstruction. It has been demonstrated that ECM-based materials, when appropriately prepared, can act as inductive templates for constructive remodeling. Specifically, such materials act as templates for the induction of de novo functional, site-appropriate, tissue formation. Herein, the diverse structural and functional roles of the ECM are reviewed to provide a rationale for the use of ECM scaffolds in regenerative medicine. Translational examples of ECM scaffolds in regenerative are provided, and the potential mechanisms by which ECM scaffolds elicit constructive remodeling are discussed. A better understanding of the ability of ECM scaffold materials to define the microenvironment of the injury site will lead to improved clinical outcomes associated with their use.<newchar><newabs>24309158<newchar>Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) play a major role in the development of cardiovascular disorders in diabetic patients. Recent studies evidenced the beneficial role of phytochemicals in reducing the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Hence the present study was framed to investigate the protective role of Gallic acid (GA) on AGEs induced cardiac fibrosis. Rats were infused with in vitro prepared AGEs (50mg/kg BW-intravenous injection) for 30 days. Further, GA (25mg/kgBW) was administered to rats along with AGEs. On infusion of AGEs, induction of fibrotic markers, collagen deposition, oxidative marker NADPH oxidase (NOX-p47 phox subunit), AGE receptor (RAGE) and cytokines expression was evaluated in the heart tissues using RT-PCR, Western blot and immunostaining methods. AGEs infusion significantly (P&lt;0.01) increased the HW/BW ratio and fibrosis (4-fold) with increased expression of matrix genes MMP-2 and -9 (P&lt;0.01, respectively) in the heart tissues. Whereas, administration of GA along with AGEs infusion prevented the fibrosis induced by AGEs. Further, GA treatment effectively prevented the AGEs mediated up-regulation of pro-fibrotic genes and ECM proteins such as TNF-α, TGF-β, MMP-2 and -9 expression. In addition, the increased expression of NOX (P&lt;0.01), RAGE (P&lt;0.01), NF-κB (P&lt;0.01) and ERK 1/2 on AGEs infusion were normalized by GA treatment. Thus the present study shows the protective effect of GA on the fibrotic response and cardiac remodeling process induced by advanced glycation end products from external sources.<newchar>Advanced glycation end products<n-term>Cardiac fibrosis<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Gallic acid<n-term>NOX<n-term>RAGE<n-term><newabs>26830603<newchar>Cardiovascular aging is a physiological process affecting all components of the heart. Despite the interest and experimental effort lavished on aging of cardiac cells, increasing evidence is pointing at the pivotal role of extracellular matrix (ECM) in cardiac aging. Structural and molecular changes in ECM composition during aging are at the root of significant functional modifications at the level of cardiac valve apparatus. Indeed, calcification or myxomatous degeneration of cardiac valves and their functional impairment can all be explained in light of age-related ECM alterations and the reciprocal interplay between altered ECM and cellular elements populating the leaflet, namely valvular interstitial cells and valvular endothelial cells, is additionally affecting valve function with striking reflexes on the clinical scenario. The initial experimental findings on this argument are underlining the need for a more comprehensive understanding on the biological mechanisms underlying ECM aging and remodeling as potentially constituting a pharmacological therapeutic target or a basis to improve existing prosthetic devices and treatment options. Given the lack of systematic knowledge on this topic, this review will focus on the ECM changes that occur during aging and on their clinical translational relevance and implications in the bedside scenario.<newchar>Aging<n-term>Cardiac valves<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Valvular endothelial cells<n-term>Valvular interstitial cells<n-term><newabs>26478910<newchar>Adult mammalian CNS neurons often degenerate after injury, leading to lost neurologic functions. In the visual system, retinal or optic nerve injury often leads to retinal ganglion cell axon degeneration and irreversible vision loss. CNS axon degeneration is increasingly linked to the innate immune response to injury, which leads to tissue-destructive inflammation and scarring. Extracellular matrix (ECM) technology can reduce inflammation, while increasing functional tissue remodeling, over scarring, in various tissues and organs, including the peripheral nervous system. However, applying ECM technology to CNS injuries has been limited and virtually unstudied in the visual system. Here we discuss advances in deriving fetal CNS-specific ECMs, like fetal porcine brain, retina, and optic nerve, and fetal non-CNS-specific ECMs, like fetal urinary bladder, and the potential for using tissue-specific ECMs to treat retinal or optic nerve injuries in two platforms. The first platform is an ECM hydrogel that can be administered as a retrobulbar, periocular, or even intraocular injection. The second platform is an ECM hydrogel and polymer &quot;biohybrid&quot; sheet that can be readily shaped and wrapped around a nerve. Both platforms can be tuned mechanically and biochemically to deliver factors like neurotrophins, immunotherapeutics, or stem cells. Since clinical CNS therapies often use general anti-inflammatory agents, which can reduce tissue-destructive inflammation but also suppress tissue-reparative immune system functions, tissue-specific, ECM-based devices may fill an important need by providing naturally derived, biocompatible, and highly translatable platforms that can modulate the innate immune response to promote a positive functional outcome.<newchar>ECM<n-term>axon regeneration<n-term>immunotherapy<n-term>regenerative medicine<n-term>retinal ganglion cell<n-term><newabs>23436761<newchar>The extracellular matrices of a variety of human and animal tissues have been utilized as scaffold materials for soft tissue applications including hernia repair, dermal grafts, and tendon, ligament, and cartilage reconstruction. While these biological scaffolds are expected to demonstrate superior tissue integration, there is very little evidence documenting the properties and behavior of these materials in vivo. This in vivo study investigated four biological scaffolds: two commercially available (a moderately crosslinked scaffold and a noncrosslinked scaffold) and two novel porcine diaphragm biological scaffolds (one with and one without the incorporation of gold nanoparticles). The scaffolds were implanted in a porcine model and evaluated over 1, 3, and 6 months. The moderately crosslinked scaffolds demonstrated the least cellular infiltration and evidence of fibrosis. The noncrosslinked scaffolds demonstrated the greatest cellular infiltration, but these scaffolds were delaminated and exhibited a rapid loss of integrity. The porcine diaphragm scaffolds with and without nanoparticles showed evidence of tissue remodeling and cellular infiltration, with no evidence of encapsulation. While there were no significant differences in the performance of the two novel scaffolds, the gold nanoparticle scaffold typically exhibited higher cellular infiltration. This study demonstrated the potential biocompatibility of a gold nanoparticle-tissue scaffold.<newchar>crosslinked<n-term>extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>nanoparticle<n-term>porcine tissue<n-term>scaffold<n-term><newabs>26903264<newchar>Abdominal aortic aneurysm is a multifactorial disease that is a leading cause of death in developed countries. Matrix-metalloproteases (MMPs) are part of the disease process, however, assessing their role in disease initiation and progression has been difficult and animal models have become essential. Combining Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) proteolytic beacons activated in the presence of MMPs with 2-photon microscopy allows for a novel method of evaluating MMP activity within the extracellular matrix (ECM). Single and 2-photon spectra for proteolytic beacons were determined in vitro. Ex vivo experiments using the apolipoprotein E knockout angiotensin II-infused mouse model of aneurysm imaged ECM architecture simultaneously with the MMP-activated FRET beacons. 2-photon spectra of the two-color proteolytic beacons showed peaks for the individual fluorophores that enable imaging of MMP activity through proteolytic cleavage. Ex vivo imaging of the beacons within the ECM revealed both microstructure and MMP activity. 2-photon imaging of the beacons in aneurysmal tissue showed an increase in proteolytic cleavage within the ECM (p&lt;0.001), thus indicating an increase in MMP activity. Our data suggest that FRET-based proteolytic beacons show promise in assessing MMP activity within the ECM and will therefore allow future studies to identify the heterogeneous distribution of simultaneous ECM remodeling and protease activity in aneurysmal disease.<newchar>AAA<n-term>ApoE<n-term>FRET<n-term>MMP<n-term>multiphoton<n-term><newabs>23722647<newchar>Using a top-down approach, an agent-based model was developed within NetLogo where cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) fibers were composed of multiple agents to create deformable structures capable of exerting, reacting to, and transmitting mechanical force. At the beginning of the simulation, long fibers were randomly distributed and cross linked. Throughout the simulation, imposed rules allowed cells to exert traction forces by extending pseudopodia, binding to fibers and pulling them towards the cell. Simulated cells remodeled the fibrous matrix to change both the density and alignment of fibers and migrated within the matrix in ways that are consistent with previous experimental work. For example, cells compacted the matrix in their pericellular regions much more than the average compaction experienced for the entire matrix (696% versus 21%). Between pairs of cells, the matrix density increased (by 92%) and the fibers became more aligned (anisotropy index increased from 0.45 to 0.68) in the direction parallel to a line connecting the two cells, consistent with the &quot;lines of tension&quot; observed in experiments by others. Cells migrated towards one another at an average rate of ∼0.5 cell diameters per 10,000 arbitrary units (AU); faster migration occurred in simulations where the fiber density in the intercellular area was greater. To explore the potential contribution of matrix stiffness gradients in the observed migration (i.e., durotaxis), the model was altered to contain a regular lattice of fibers possessing a stiffness gradient and just a single cell. In these simulations cells migrated preferentially in the direction of increasing stiffness at a rate of ∼2 cell diameter per 10,000 AU. This work demonstrates that matrix remodeling and durotaxis, both complex phenomena, might be emergent behaviors based on just a few rules that control how a cell can interact with a fibrous ECM.<newchar><newabs>22581694<newchar>It is well known that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is involved in the toxicity of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAH) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Recent experiments have shown the induction of impaired tooth and hard-tissue formation by AhR pathway activation, however, the effect on periodontal ligament (PDL) tissue remains unclear. Here, we investigated the effects of benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), a member of PAH, on the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling-related molecules, collagen type I (COL-I), matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) expression, and apoptosis in two different human periodontal ligament cells (HPDLCs). The transduction of AhR from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and the increase of AhR-responsive genes; that is, cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1), cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1), and aryl-hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR), expression was induced by BaP exposure in both HPDLCs. BaP treatment significantly enhanced MMP-1 mRNA expression and MMP-1 protein production, while markedly suppressing COL-I and a-SMA mRNA expression in both HPDLCs. Furthermore, these BaP-treated HPDLCs fell into apoptotic cell death as evidenced by induction in annexin V and caspase-3/7 staining and reduction of total cell number and Bcl-2 mRNA expression. Thus, BaP exposure altered the expression of ECM-related molecules and induced apoptosis in HPDLCs through activation of the AhR pathway. Overactivity of the AhR pathway may induce an inappropriate turnover of PDL tissue via disordered ECM remodeling and apoptosis in PDL cells.<newchar><newabs>21593211<newchar>Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are characterized by pathological remodeling of the aortic extracellular matrix (ECM). However, besides the well-characterized elastolysis and collagenolysis little is known about changes in other ECM proteins. Previous proteomics studies on AAA focused on cellular changes without emphasis on the ECM. In the present study, ECM proteins and their degradation products were selectively extracted from aneurysmal and control aortas using a solubility-based subfractionation methodology and analyzed by gel-liquid chromatography-tandem MS and label-free quantitation. The proteomics analysis revealed novel changes in the ECM of AAA, including increased expression as well as degradation of collagen XII, thrombospondin 2, aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein, periostin, fibronectin and tenascin. Proteomics also confirmed the accumulation of macrophage metalloelastase (MMP-12). Incubation of control aortic tissue with recombinant MMP-12 resulted in the extensive fragmentation of these glycoproteins, most of which are novel substrates of MMP-12. In conclusion, our proteomics methodology allowed the first detailed analysis of the ECM in AAA and identified markers of pathological ECM remodeling related to MMP-12 activity.<newchar><newabs>25940763<newchar>Vascular remodeling caused by extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism contributes to the development of cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). The balance between tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) plays an important role in ECM remodeling. We investigated the mechanism of vascular remodeling following cerebral vasospasm in a rabbit double hemorrhage model. Rabbit basilar arteries were harvested on days 3, 5, and 7 after initial hemorrhage. TIMP-1, TIMP-2, MMP-2, and MMP-9 mRNA and protein expression were investigated with microarray analysis, quantitative real-time PCR, immunoblot analysis, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The expression and localization of TIMP-1, TIMP-2, MMP-2, MMP-9, elastin, fibronectin, laminin, and collagens I, III, and IV were investigated with immuohistochemical staining. After SAH, TIMP-1 mRNA and protein expression were significantly increased on day 3 and then decreased to the control level on days 5 and 7. MMP-9 protein expression was significantly increased on day 7. TIMP-2 and MMP-2 mRNA and protein expression were significantly increased on day 7. Elastin, fibronectin, laminin, and collagens I, III, and IV protein expression was decreased on day 3 and then restored to control levels on day 7. Upregulation of TIMP-1 during the early phase of cerebral vasospasm may contribute to the recovery of the ECM during the late phase of cerebral vasospasm, resulting in a protective role of TIMP-1 from cerebral vasospasm. Moreover, the increase in arterial compliance by the decrease in ECM during the early phase of cerebral vasospasm may facilitate vasoconstriction of the cerebral artery.<newchar>Cerebral vasospasm<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>Subarachnoid hemorrhage<n-term>Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase<n-term>Vascular remodeling<n-term><newabs>22834826<newchar>Tissue remodeling is critical during development and wound healing. It also characterizes a number of pathologic conditions, including chronic inflammation, fibrosis and cancer. It is well appreciated that reactive stromal cells play critical roles in these settings. However, understanding of the mechanisms involved in the differentiation of reactive stromal cells and their biologic activities has been hampered by the fact that they are generated from diverse progenitors, and by their phenotypic and function heterogeneity. Furthermore, molecular markers that are expressed by all reactive stromal cells and that distinguish them from all other cell types have been lacking. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is a serine protease that was originally discovered as a cell surface protein expressed on astrocytomas and sarcomas. Over the last two decades, FAP has attracted increasing attention as a selective marker of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and more broadly, of activated fibroblasts in tissues undergoing remodeling of their extracellular matrix (ECM) due to chronic inflammation, fibrosis or wound healing. Herein we review the evidence that FAP is indeed a robust and selective marker for reactive mesenchymal stromal cells associated with pathophysiologic tissue remodeling. We also review recent insights obtained using FAP as a tool to define the relationship between subpopulations of reactive stromal cells in various settings of tissue remodeling. Furthermore, we review recent genetic and pharmacologic data indicating that FAP and FAP-expressing cells play important roles in such conditions. Finally, we discuss the potential risks and therapeutic benefits of targeting FAP and FAP-expressing cells, as well as approaches to do so.<newchar><newabs>24190237<newchar>Denervation alters the metabolism of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in skeletal muscle; however, the underlying mechanisms of ECM remodeling are not fully understood. The aim of this study was to elucidate the dynamic features of the ECM regulatory process in the early phase of denervated skeletal muscle in male Wistar rats. We investigated the expression of collagens (total, type I, and type III), transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1), and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) together with their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs), at the mRNA and/or protein level in the soleus muscles of control animals and at days 3, 7, and 14 post-denervation. Expression of mRNA encoding collagens was decreased at days 3 and 7, and had recovered by day 14, in parallel with total collagen protein content. Content of TGF-β1 protein was elevated sequentially, up to a maximum of 158% at day 14 post-denervation (P &lt; 0.05), as was TIMP-2 mRNA expression (272% at day 14), whereas MMP-1, MMP-2, and TIMP-1 mRNA expression was not affected at any stage. The initial reduction of collagen mRNA may be responsible for hypoactivity caused by the disappearance of contractile function. Recovery of collagen mRNA/protein at day 14 may be due mainly to the suppressive effects of TGF-β1 on collagen degradation via TIMP-2 upregulation.<newchar><newabs>21858856<newchar>The host response and remodeling of ECM scaffolds are believed to be critical determinants of success or failure in repair or reconstructive procedures. Host response has been investigated in subcutaneous or abdominal wall implantation models. The extent to which evaluation of the host response to ECM intended for tendon or ligament repair should be performed in an orthotopic site is not known. This study compared the host response to human-derived fascia lata ECM among various implantation sites in the rat model. Results showed that a xenograft in the rat shoulder does not exhibit a different host response at 7 days from xenograft in the body wall, suggesting that either site may be appropriate to study the early host response to biologic grafts as well as the effect of various treatments aimed to modify the early host response. By 28 days, a xenograft in the rat shoulder does elicit a unique host response from that seen in the body wall. Therefore, it may be more appropriate to use an orthotopic shoulder model for investigating the long-term host response and remodeling of biologic grafts to be used for rotator cuff repair.<newchar><newabs>26613601<newchar>Uterine leiomyomas are benign tumors in the smooth muscle layer of the uterus. The most common histological type is the &quot;usual leiomyoma&quot;, characterized by overexpression of ECM proteins, whereas the &quot;cellular type&quot; has higher cellular content. Our objective is to investigate the involvement of inflammatory and reparative processes in leiomyoma pathobiology. Using a morphological approach, we investigate the presence of inflammatory cells. Next, we determine the localization of the ECM, the presence/absence of fibrotic cells via α-sma and desmin and the immunohistochemical profile of the mesenchymal cells with respect to CD34. Finally, we explore the effect of inflammatory mediators (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-15, GM-CSF and IFN-γ) on pro-fibrotic factor activin A mRNA expression in vitro. Higher numbers of macrophages were found inside and close to leiomyomas as compared to the more distant myometrium. Cellular leiomyomas showed more macrophages and mast cells than the &quot;usual type&quot;. Inside the fibroid tissue, we found cells positive for α-sma, but negative for desmin and a large amount of collagen surrounding the nodule, suggestive of myofibroblasts producing ECM. In the myometrium and leiomyomas of the &quot;usual type&quot;, we identified numerous CD34+ fibroblasts, which are known to give rise to myofibroblasts upon loss of CD34 expression. In leiomyomas of the &quot;cellular type&quot;, stromal fibroblasts were CD34-negative. Finally, we found that TNF-α increased activin A mRNA in myometrial and leiomyoma cells. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the presence of inflammatory cells in uterine leiomyomas, which may contribute to excessive ECM production, tissue remodeling and leiomyoma growth.<newchar>Activin A<n-term>CD34<n-term>Cellular leiomyoma<n-term>ECM<n-term>Inflammation<n-term>Myofibroblast<n-term>Myometrium<n-term>TNF-α<n-term>Usual leiomyoma<n-term><newabs>26477404<newchar>During tumor progression, cancer cells interact and communicate with non-malignant cells within their local microenvironment. Microvesicles (MV) derived from human cancer cells play an important role in mediating this communication. Another critical aspect of cancer progression involves widespread ECM remodeling, which occur both at the primary and metastatic sites. ECM remodeling and reorganization within the tumor microenvironment is generally attributed to fibroblasts. Here, using MCF10a cells, a well-characterized breast epithelial cell line that exhibits a non-malignant epithelial phenotype, and MVs shed by aggressive MDA-MB-231 carcinoma cells, we show that non-malignant epithelial cells can participate in ECM reorganization of 3D collagen matrices following their treatment with cancer cell-derived MVs. In addition, MVs trigger several changes in epithelial cells under 3D culture conditions. Furthermore, we show that this ECM reorganization is associated with an increase in cellular traction force following MV treatment, higher acto-myosin contractility, and higher FAK activity. Overall, our findings suggest that MVs derived from tumor cells can contribute to ECM reorganization occurring within the tumor microenvironment by enhancing the contractility of non-malignant epithelial cells.<newchar>Cell contractility<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Microvesicle<n-term>Oncosomes<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>23229284<newchar>Chronic inflammation and remodeling of the bronchial wall are basic hallmarks of asthma. During the process of bronchial wall remodeling, inflammatory factors, such as transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), are known to induce the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, which leads to excessive synthesis and secretion of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, thus thickening and stiffening the basement membrane. However, it has not been thoroughly studied whether or not substrate stiffening affects the TGF-β1‑induced myofibroblast differentiation. In the present study, the influence of substrate stiffness on the process of bronchial fibroblast differentiation into myofibroblasts in the presence of TGF-β1 was investigated. To address this question, we synthesized polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates with varying degrees of stiffness (Young's modulus of 1, 10 and 50 kPa, respectively). We cultured bronchial fibroblasts on the substrates of varying stiffness in media containing TGF-β1 (10 ng/ml) to stimulate the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. Myofibroblast differentiation was examined using semi-quantitative RT-PCR for the expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) mRNA and collagen I mRNA, the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method was used to assess the expression of collagen I protein and western blotting to assess the expression of α-SMA protein. The optical magnetic twisting cytometry (OMTC) method was used for the changing of cell mechanical properties. Our findings suggest that when fibroblasts were incubated with TGF-β1 (10 ng/ml) on substrate of varying stiffness, the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts was enhanced by increasing substrate stiffness. Compared with those cultured on substrate with Young's modulus of 1 kPa, the mRNA and protein expression of collagen I and α-SMA of fibroblasts cultured on substrates with Young's modulus of 10 and 50 kPa were increased. Furthermore, with the increase of substrate stiffness, the cell stiffness and contractility were also increased, which also indicated further aggravation of asthma. This finding may help better understand the underlying mechanisms of hyperplasia of myofibroblasts in asthma, which has a marked significance in the therapy of asthma.<newchar><newabs>26805763<newchar>Desmoplasia and hypoxia in pancreatic cancer mutually affect each other and create a tumor-supportive microenvironment. Here, we show that microenvironment remodeling by hypoxic pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) promotes cancer cell motility through alteration of extracellular matrix (ECM) fiber architecture. Three-dimensional (3-D) matrices derived from PSCs under hypoxia exhibited highly organized parallel-patterned matrix fibers compared with 3-D matrices derived from PSCs under normoxia, and promoted cancer cell motility by inducing directional migration of cancer cells due to the parallel fiber architecture. Microarray analysis revealed that procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 2 (PLOD2) in PSCs was the gene that potentially regulates ECM fiber architecture under hypoxia. Stromal PLOD2 expression in surgical specimens of pancreatic cancer was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of PLOD2 in PSCs blocked parallel fiber architecture of 3-D matrices, leading to decreased directional migration of cancer cells within the matrices. In conclusion, these findings indicate that hypoxia-induced PLOD2 expression in PSCs creates a permissive microenvironment for migration of cancer cells through architectural regulation of stromal ECM in pancreatic cancer.<newchar>ECM remodeling<n-term>Hypoxia<n-term>PLOD2<n-term>Pancreatic cancer<n-term>Pancreatic stellate cell<n-term><newabs>21384200<newchar>Mechanical cues that trigger pathological remodeling in smooth muscle tissues remain largely unknown and are thought to be pivotal triggers for strain-induced remodeling. Thus, an understanding of the effects mechanical stimulation is important to elucidate underlying mechanisms of disease states and in the development of methods for smooth muscle tissue regeneration. For example, the urinary bladder wall (UBW) adaptation to spinal cord injury (SCI) includes extensive hypertrophy as well as increased collagen and elastin, all of which profoundly alter its mechanical response. In addition, the pro-fibrotic growth factor TGF-β1 is upregulated in pathologies of other smooth muscle tissues and may contribute to pathological remodeling outcomes. In the present study, we utilized an ex vivo organ culture system to investigate the response of UBW tissue under various strain-based mechanical stimuli and exogenous TGF-β1 to assess extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis, mechanical responses, and bladder smooth muscle cell (BSMC) phenotype. Results indicated that a 0.5-Hz strain frequency triangular waveform stimulation at 15% strain resulted in fibrillar elastin production, collagen turnover, and a more compliant ECM. Further, this stretch regime induced changes in cell phenotype while the addition of TGF-β1 altered this phenotype. This phenotypic shift was further confirmed by passive strip biomechanical testing, whereby the bladder groups treated with TGF-β1 were more compliant than all other groups. TGF-β1 increased soluble collagen production in the cultured bladders. Overall, the 0.5-Hz strain-induced remodeling caused increased compliance due to elastogenesis, similar to that seen in early SCI bladders. Thus, organ culture of bladder strips can be used as an experimental model to examine ECM remodeling and cellular phenotypic shift and potentially elucidate BMSCs ability to produce fibrillar elastin using mechanical stretch either alone or in combination with growth factors.<newchar><newabs>23404867<newchar>While a variety of natural and synthetic matrices have been used to influence embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal or differentiation, and ESCs also deposit a rich matrix of their own, the mechanisms behind how extracellular matrix affects cell fate are largely unexplored. The ESC matrix is continuously remodeled by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a process that we find is enhanced by the presence of mouse embryonic fibroblast feeders in a paracrine manner. Matrix remodeling by MMPs aids in the self-renewal of ESCs, as inhibition of MMPs inhibits the ability of ESCs to self-renew. We also find that addition of the interstitial collagenase MMP1 is sufficient to maintain long-term leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)-independent mouse ESC (mESC) self-renewal in a dose-dependent manner. This remarkable ability is due to the presence of endogenously produced self-renewal-inducing signals, including the LIF-family ligand ciliary neurotrophic factor, that are normally trapped within the ECM and become exposed upon MMP-induced matrix remodeling to signal through JAK and Stat3. These results uncover a new role for feeder cells in maintaining self-renewal and show that mESCs normally produce sufficient levels of autocrine-acting pro-self-renewal ligands.<newchar><newabs>25422415<newchar>The role of cell-free extracellular matrix (ECM) in triggering tissue and organ regeneration has gained increased recognition, yet current approaches are predominantly based on the use of ECM from fully developed native tissues at nonhomologous sites. We describe a strategy to generate customized ECM, designed to activate endogenous regenerative programs by recapitulating tissue-specific developmental processes. The paradigm was exemplified in the context of the skeletal system by testing the osteoinductive capacity of engineered and devitalized hypertrophic cartilage, which is the primordial template for the development of most bones. ECM was engineered by inducing chondrogenesis of human mesenchymal stromal cells and devitalized by the implementation of a death-inducible genetic device, leading to cell apoptosis on activation and matrix protein preservation. The resulting hypertrophic cartilage ECM, tested in a stringent ectopic implantation model, efficiently remodeled to form de novo bone tissue of host origin, including mature vasculature and a hematopoietic compartment. Importantly, cartilage ECM could not generate frank bone tissue if devitalized by standard &quot;freeze &amp; thaw&quot; (F&amp;T) cycles, associated with a significant loss of glycosaminoglycans, mineral content, and ECM-bound cytokines critically involved in inflammatory, vascularization, and remodeling processes. These results support the utility of engineered ECM-based devices as off-the-shelf regenerative niches capable of recruiting and instructing resident cells toward the formation of a specific tissue.<newchar>developmental engineering<n-term>endochondral<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hematopoisesis<n-term>osteoinductive<n-term><newabs>25344066<newchar>Cigarette smoke is a common environmental insult associated with increased risk of developing airway diseases such as wheezing and asthma in neonates and children. In adults, asthma involves airway remodeling characterized by increased airway smooth muscle (ASM) cell proliferation and increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, as well as airway hyperreactivity. The effects of cigarette smoke on remodeling and contractility in the developing airway are not well-elucidated. In this study, we used canalicular-stage (18-20 wk gestational age) human fetal airway smooth muscle (fASM) cells as an in vitro model of the immature airway. fASM cells were exposed to cigarette smoke extract (CSE; 0.5-1.5% for 24-72 h), and cell proliferation, ECM deposition, and intracellular calcium ([Ca(2+)]i) responses to agonist (histamine 10 μM) were used to evaluate effects on remodeling and hyperreactivity. CSE significantly increased cell proliferation and deposition of ECM molecules collagen I, collagen III, and fibronectin. In contrast, [Ca(2+)]i responses were not significantly affected by CSE. Analysis of key signaling pathways demonstrated significant increase in extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and p38 activation with CSE. Inhibition of ERK or p38 signaling prevented CSE-mediated changes in proliferation, whereas only ERK inhibition attenuated the CSE-mediated increase in ECM deposition. Overall, these results demonstrate that cigarette smoke may enhance remodeling in developing human ASM through hyperplasia and ECM production, thus contributing to development of neonatal and pediatric airway disease.<newchar>asthma<n-term>collagen<n-term>lung development<n-term>prematurity<n-term><newabs>21885799<newchar>Current surgical management of volume overload-induced heart failure (HF) leads to variable recovery of left ventricular (LV) function despite a return of LV geometry. The mechanisms that prevent restoration of function are unknown but may be related to the timing of intervention and the degree of LV contractile impairment. This study determined whether reduction of aortocaval fistula (ACF)-induced LV volume overload during the compensatory stage of HF results in beneficial LV structural remodeling and restoration of pump function. Rats were subjected to ACF for 4 wk; a subset then received a load-reversal procedure by closing the shunt using a custom-made stent graft approach. Echocardiography or in vivo pressure-volume analysis was used to assess LV morphology and function in sham rats; rats subjected to 4-, 8-, or 15-wk ACF; and rats subjected to 4-wk ACF followed by 4- or 11-wk reversal. Structural and functional changes were correlated to LV collagen content, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and hypertrophic markers. ACF-induced volume overload led to progressive LV chamber dilation and contractile dysfunction. Rats subjected to short-term reversal (4-wk ACF + 4-wk reversal) exhibited improved chamber dimensions (LV diastolic dimension) and LV compliance that were associated with ECM remodeling and normalization of atrial and brain natriuretic peptides. Load-independent parameters indicated LV systolic (preload recruitable stroke work, Ees) and diastolic dysfunction (tau, arterial elastance). These changes were associated with an altered α/β-myosin heavy chain ratio. However, these changes were normalized to sham levels in long-term reversal rats (4-wk ACF + 11-wk reversal). Acute hemodynamic changes following ACF reversal improve LV geometry, but LV dysfunction persists. Gradual restoration of function was related to normalization of eccentric hypertrophy, LV wall stress, and ECM remodeling. These results suggest that mild to moderate LV systolic dysfunction may be an important indicator of the ability of the myocardium to remodel following the reversal of hemodynamic overload.<newchar><newabs>26059707<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a highly-dynamic compartment that undergoes remodeling as a result of injury and repair. Over the past decade, mounting evidence in humans and rodents suggests that ECM remodeling is associated with diet-induced insulin resistance in several metabolic tissues. In addition, integrin receptors for the ECM have also been implicated in the regulation of insulin action. This review addresses what is currently known about the ECM, integrins, and insulin action in the muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. Understanding how ECM remodeling and integrin signaling regulate insulin action may aid in the development of new therapeutic targets for the treatment of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2D).<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>glucose homeostasis<n-term>insulin resistance<n-term>integrins<n-term>liver<n-term>muscle<n-term><newabs>24590289<newchar>Pathological remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by fibroblasts leads to organ failure. Development of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is characterized by a progressive fibrotic scarring in the lung that ultimately leads to asphyxiation; however, the cascade of events that promote IPF are not well defined. Here, we examined how the interplay between the ECM and fibroblasts affects both the transcriptome and translatome by culturing primary fibroblasts generated from IPF patient lung tissue or nonfibrotic lung tissue on decellularized lung ECM from either IPF or control patients. Surprisingly, the origin of the ECM had a greater impact on gene expression than did cell origin, and differences in translational control were more prominent than alterations in transcriptional regulation. Strikingly, genes that were translationally activated by IPF-derived ECM were enriched for those encoding ECM proteins detected in IPF tissue. We determined that genes encoding IPF-associated ECM proteins are targets for miR-29, which was downregulated in fibroblasts grown on IPF-derived ECM, and baseline expression of ECM targets could be restored by overexpression of miR-29. Our data support a model in which fibroblasts are activated to pathologically remodel the ECM in IPF via a positive feedback loop between fibroblasts and aberrant ECM. Interrupting this loop may be a strategy for IPF treatment.<newchar><newabs>26140710<newchar>Aging is a major risk factor for the development of cardiovascular disease, with the majority of affected patients being elderly. Progressive changes to myocardial structure and function occur with aging, often in concert with underlying pathologies. However, whether chronological aging results in a remodeled &quot;aged substrate&quot; has yet to be established. In addition to myocyte contractility, myocardial performance relies heavily on the cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM), the roles of which are as dynamic as they are significant; including providing structural integrity, assisting in force transmission throughout the cardiac cycle and acting as a signaling medium for communication between cells and the extracellular environment. In the healthy heart, ECM homeostasis must be maintained, and matrix deposition is in balance with degradation. Consequently, alterations to, or misregulation of the cardiac ECM has been shown to occur in both aging and in pathological remodeling with disease. Mounting evidence suggests that age-induced matrix remodeling may occur at the level of ECM control; including collagen synthesis, deposition, maturation, and degradation. Furthermore, experimental studies using aged animal models not only suggest that the aged heart may respond differently to insult than the young, but the identification of key players specific to remodeling with age may hold future therapeutic potential for the treatment of cardiac dysfunction in the elderly. This review will focus on the role of the cardiac interstitium in the physiology of the aging myocardium, with particular emphasis on the implications to age-related remodeling in disease.<newchar><newabs>25232775<newchar>Biomaterials with direct intramyocardial injection devices have been developed and are being investigated as a potential cardiac regenerative therapy for end-stage ischemic heart failure. Decellularized extracellular matrix (ECM) has been shown to improve cardiac function and attenuate or reverse pathologic remodeling cascades. CorMatrix Cardiovascular, Inc. has developed a porcine small intestinal submucosa-derived particulate extracellular matrix (P-ECM) and ECM Delivery System to provide uniform and controlled intramyocardial delivery of the injectable P-ECM material into infarcted regions. The CorMatrix ECM Delivery System is composed of a Multi-Needle P-ECM Syringe Assembly, Automated Injection Controller, and Tissue Depth Measurement System (portable ultrasound). Feasibility of the P-ECM delivery system was tested intraoperatively in a chronic ischemic heart failure bovine model (n = 11), and demonstrated the ability to control injection volume (0.1-1.0 ml) and depth of penetration (3-5 mm) under regulated injection pressure (150 psi CO2) into the ischemic region. Targeted intramyocardial delivery of P-ECM may improve efficacy and enable development of novel patient-specific therapy.<newchar><newabs>26562801<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is a non-cellular three-dimensional macromolecular network composed of collagens, proteoglycans/glycosaminoglycans, elastin, fibronectin, laminins, and several other glycoproteins. Matrix components bind each other as well as cell adhesion receptors forming a complex network into which cells reside in all tissues and organs. Cell surface receptors transduce signals into cells from ECM, which regulate diverse cellular functions, such as survival, growth, migration, and differentiation, and are vital for maintaining normal homeostasis. ECM is a highly dynamic structural network that continuously undergoes remodeling mediated by several matrix-degrading enzymes during normal and pathological conditions. Deregulation of ECM composition and structure is associated with the development and progression of several pathologic conditions. This article emphasizes in the complex ECM structure as to provide a better understanding of its dynamic structural and functional multipotency. Where relevant, the implication of the various families of ECM macromolecules in health and disease is also presented.<newchar>Cancer<n-term>Collagen<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Glycosaminoglycans<n-term>Integrins<n-term>Matrix metalloproteases<n-term>Pharmacological targeting<n-term>Proteoglycans<n-term><newabs>22362893<newchar>Thrombospondin-4 (TSP-4) expression increases dramatically in hypertrophic and failing hearts in rodent models and in humans. The aim of this study was to address the function of TSP-4 in the heart. TSP-4-knockout (Thbs4(-/-)) and wild-type (WT) mice were subjected to transverse aortic constriction (TAC) to increase left ventricle load. After 2 wk, Thbs4(-/-) mice had a significantly higher heart weight/body weight ratio than WT mice. The additional increase in the heart weight in TAC Thbs4(-/-) mice was due to increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM). The levels of interstitial collagens were higher in the knockout mice, but the size of cardiomyocytes and apoptosis in the myocardium was unaffected by TSP-4 deficiency, suggesting that increased reactive fibrosis was the primary cause of the higher heart weight. The increased ECM deposition in Thbs4(-/-) mice was accompanied by changes in functional parameters of the heart and decreased vessel density. The expression of inflammatory and fibrotic genes known to be influential in myocardial remodeling changed as a result of TSP-4 deficiency in vivo and as a result of incubation of cells with recombinant TSP-4 in vitro. Thus, TSP-4 is involved in regulating the adaptive responses of the heart to pressure overload, suggesting its important role in myocardial remodeling. Our study showed a direct influence of TSP-4 on heart function and to identify the mechanism of its effects on heart remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23220517<newchar>Patients with aortic stenosis develop various degrees of myocardial hypertrophy and heart failure (HF) despite comparable transvalvular gradients. An important element in the transition from compensated hypertrophy to HF is dilatation of the left ventricle (LV). The molecular pathology associated with LV dilatation and development of HF is not known. Thus, we examined potential differences in the regulation of myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents in mice with hypertrophy only (ABnonHF) and with HF (ABHF) as response to comparable pressure overload. The ascending aorta was banded, or left loose in sham-operated mice. Increased lung weight and left atrial diameter indicating pulmonary congestion were used to identify ABHF mice. Cardiac function and geometry were evaluated by echocardiography. Despite comparable pressure gradients and cardiac output, ABHF had reduced fractional shortening (23%), reduced systolic (28%) and diastolic (32%) tissue velocity and increased LV internal dimension in diastole (10%) and systole (17%) (LVIDd/s) compared to ABnonHF (p≤0.05). Microarray analyses identified 120 differently regulated genes related to ECM in ABHF compared to ABnonHF (p≤0.05). Interestingly, in ABHF, we found a 24% (p≤0.05) reduction of the LV collagen VIII protein levels despite increased levels of LV total collagen by 23% (p≤0.05). LV collagen VIII correlated negatively with LVIDd (R=0.55, p=0.03) and LVIDs (R=0.72, p=0.002). As this protein may function as a &quot;sealant&quot; binding collagen fibrils together, reduction of collagen VIII could potentially contribute to LV dilatation and development of HF.<newchar><newabs>25930943<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a major component of the biomechanical environment with which cells interact, and it plays important roles in both normal development and disease progression. Mechanical and biochemical factors alter the biomechanical properties of tissues by driving cellular remodeling of the ECM. This review provides an overview of the structural, compositional, and mechanical properties of the ECM that instruct cell behaviors. Case studies are reviewed that highlight mechanotransduction in the context of two distinct tissues: tendons and the heart. Although these two tissues demonstrate differences in relative cell-ECM composition and mechanical environment, they share similar mechanisms underlying ECM dysfunction and cell mechanotransduction. Together, these topics provide a framework for a fundamental understanding of the ECM and how it may vary across normal and diseased tissues in response to mechanical and biochemical cues. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mechanobiology.<newchar>Biomechanics<n-term>Cell mechanics<n-term>Cytoskeleton<n-term>Diastolic dysfunction<n-term>Mechanotransduction<n-term>Tendinopathy<n-term><newabs>24926297<newchar>Cell walls are deeply involved in the molecular talk between partners during plant and microbe interactions, and their role in mycorrhizae, i.e., the widespread symbiotic associations established between plant roots and soil fungi, has been investigated extensively. All mycorrhizal interactions achieve full symbiotic functionality through the development of an extensive contact surface between the plant and fungal cells, where signals and nutrients are exchanged. The exchange of molecules between the fungal and the plant cytoplasm takes place both through their plasma membranes and their cell walls; a functional compartment, known as the symbiotic interface, is thus defined. Among all the symbiotic interfaces, the complex intracellular interface of arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis has received a great deal of attention since its first description. Here, in fact, the host plasma membrane invaginates and proliferates around all the developing intracellular fungal structures, and cell wall material is laid down between this membrane and the fungal cell surface. By contrast, in ectomycorrhizae (ECM), where the fungus grows outside and between the root cells, plant and fungal cell walls are always in direct contact and form the interface between the two partners. The organization and composition of cell walls within the interface compartment is a topic that has attracted widespread attention, both in ecto- and endomycorrhizae. The aim of this review is to provide a general overview of the current knowledge on this topic by integrating morphological observations, which have illustrated cell wall features during mycorrhizal interactions, with the current data produced by genomic and transcriptomic approaches.<newchar>cell wall<n-term>fungal genomes<n-term>gene expression<n-term>interface<n-term>mycorrhizal interactions<n-term><newabs>22880017<newchar>Embryonic heart valve primordia (cushions) maintain unidirectional blood flow during development despite an increasingly demanding mechanical environment. Recent studies demonstrate that atrioventricular (AV) cushions stiffen over gestation, but the molecular mechanisms of this process are unknown. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFβ) and serotonin (5-HT) signaling modulate tissue biomechanics of postnatal valves, but less is known of their role in the biomechanical remodeling of embryonic valves. In this study, we demonstrate that exogenous TGFβ3 increases AV cushion biomechanical stiffness and residual stress, but paradoxically reduces matrix compaction. We then show that TGFβ3 induces contractile gene expression (RhoA, aSMA) and extracellular matrix expression (col1α2) in cushion mesenchyme, while simultaneously stimulating a two-fold increase in proliferation. Local compaction increased due to an elevated contractile phenotype, but global compaction appeared reduced due to proliferation and ECM synthesis. Blockade of TGFβ type I receptors via SB431542 inhibited the TGFβ3 effects. We next showed that exogenous 5-HT does not influence cushion stiffness by itself, but synergistically increases cushion stiffness with TGFβ3 co-treatment. 5-HT increased TGFβ3 gene expression and also potentiated TGFβ3 induced gene expression in a dose-dependent manner. Blockade of the 5HT2b receptor, but not 5-HT2a receptor or serotonin transporter (SERT), resulted in complete cessation of TGFβ3 induced mechanical strengthening. Finally, systemic 5-HT administration in ovo induced cushion remodeling related defects, including thinned/atretic AV valves, ventricular septal defects, and outflow rotation defects. Elevated 5-HT in ovo resulted in elevated remodeling gene expression and increased TGFβ signaling activity, supporting our ex-vivo findings. Collectively, these results highlight TGFβ/5-HT signaling as a potent mechanism for control of biomechanical remodeling of AV cushions during development.<newchar><newabs>23422022<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is an essential component of the human body that is responsible for the proper function of various organs. Changes in the ECM have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several cardiovascular conditions including atherosclerosis, restenosis, and heart failure. Matrix components, such as collagens and noncollagenous proteins, influence the function and activity of vascular cells, particularly vascular smooth muscle cells and macrophages. Matrix proteins have been shown to be implicated in the development of atherosclerotic complications, such as plaque rupture, aneurysm formation, and calcification. ECM proteins control ECM remodeling through feedback signaling to matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are the key players of ECM remodeling in both normal and pathological conditions. The production of MMPs is closely related to the development of an inflammatory response and is subjected to significant changes at different stages of atherosclerosis. Indeed, blood levels of circulating MMPs may be useful for the assessment of the inflammatory activity in atherosclerosis and the prediction of cardiovascular risk. The availability of a wide variety of low-molecular MMP inhibitors that can be conjugated with various labels provides a good perspective for specific targeting of MMPs and implementation of imaging techniques to visualize MMP activity in atherosclerotic plaques and, most interestingly, to monitor responses to antiatheroslerosis therapies. Finally, because of the crucial role of ECM in cardiovascular repair, the regenerative potential of ECM could be successfully used in constructing engineered scaffolds and vessels that mimic properties of the natural ECM and consist of the native ECM components or composite biomaterials. These scaffolds possess a great promise in vascular tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>22258722<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) is the three-dimensional scaffold that defines the geometry and muscular architecture of the cardiac chambers and transmits forces produced during the cardiac cycle throughout the heart wall. The cardiac ECM is an active system that responds to the stresses to which it is exposed and in the normal heart is adapted to facilitate efficient mechanical function. There are marked differences in the short- and medium-term changes in ventricular geometry and cardiac ECM that occur as a result of volume overload, hypertension, and ischemic cardiomyopathy. Despite this, there is a widespread view that a common remodeling &quot;phenotype&quot; governs the final progression to end-stage heart failure in different forms of heart disease. In this review article, we make the case that this interpretation is not consistent with the clinical and experimental data on the topic. We argue that there is a need for new theoretical and experimental models that will enable stresses acting on the ECM and resultant deformations to be estimated more accurately and provide better spatial resolution of local signaling mechanisms that are activated as a result. These developments are necessary to link the effects of structural remodeling with altered cardiac mechanical function.<newchar><newabs>22464947<newchar>The myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM), an interwoven meshwork of proteins, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans that is dominated by polymeric fibrils of type I collagen, serves as the mechanical scaffold on which myocytes are arrayed for coordinated and synergistic force transduction. Following ischemic injury, cardiac ECM remodeling is initiated via localized proteolysis, the bulk of which has been assigned to matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family members. Nevertheless, the key effector(s) of myocardial type I collagenolysis both in vitro and in vivo have remained unidentified. In this study, using cardiac explants from mice deficient in each of the major type I collagenolytic MMPs, including MMP-13, MMP-8, MMP-2, MMP-9, or MT1-MMP, we identify the membrane-anchored MMP, MT1-MMP, as the dominant collagenase that is operative within myocardial tissues in vitro. Extending these observations to an in vivo setting, mice heterozygous for an MT1-MMP-null allele display a distinct survival advantage and retain myocardial function relative to wild-type littermates in an experimental model of myocardial infarction, effects associated with preservation of the myocardial type I collagen network as a consequence of the decreased collagenolytic potential of cardiac fibroblasts. This study identifies MT1-MMP as a key MMP responsible for effecting postinfarction cardiac ECM remodeling and cardiac dysfunction.<newchar><newabs>25448408<newchar>The development of atherosclerosis involves phenotypic changes among vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) that correlate with stiffening and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). VSMCs are highly sensitive to the composition and mechanical state of the surrounding ECM, and ECM remodeling during atherosclerosis likely contributes to pathology. We hypothesized that ECM mechanics and biochemistry are interdependent in their regulation of VSMC behavior and investigated the effect of ligand presentation on certain stiffness-mediated processes. Our findings demonstrate that substrate stiffening is not a unidirectional stimulus-instead, the influence of mechanics on cell behavior is highly conditioned on ligand biochemistry. This &quot;stiffness-by-ligand&quot; effect was evident for VSMC adhesion, spreading, cytoskeletal polymerization, and focal adhesion assembly, where VSMCs cultured on fibronectin (Fn)-modified substrates showed an augmented response to increasing stiffness, whereas cells on laminin (Ln) substrates showed a dampened response. By contrast, cells on Fn substrates showed a decrease in myosin light chain (MLC) phosphorylation and elongation with increasing stiffness, whereas Ln supported an increase in MLC phosphorylation and no change in cell shape with increasing stiffness. Taken together, these findings show that identical cell populations exhibit opposing responses to substrate stiffening depending on ECM presentation. Our results also suggest that the shift in VSMC phenotype in a developing atherosclerotic lesion is jointly regulated by stromal mechanics and biochemistry. This study highlights the complex influence of the blood vessel wall microenvironment on VSMC phenotype and provides insight into how cells may integrate ECM biochemistry and mechanics during normal and pathological tissue function.<newchar>Atherosclerosis<n-term>Contraction<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Laminin<n-term>Substrate stiffness<n-term><newabs>22546924<newchar>The ability to measure real-time mechanosensitive events at the subcellular level in response to discrete mechanical stimulation is a critical component in understanding mechanically-induced cellular remodeling. Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) were transfected with RhoA constructs (wild type, dominant negative or constitutively active) or treated with ML-7 to induce specific cytoskeletal tension characteristics prior to mechanical stimulation. Tensile stress was applied to live VSMC using an atomic force microscope probe functionalized with extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The ECM induces selective integrin activation and focal adhesion formation, enabling direct manipulation of cortical actin through an active ECM-integrin-actin linkage. Therefore, locally induced mechanosensitive events triggered downstream activation of intracellular signaling pathways responsible for actin and focal adhesion remodeling throughout the cell. Integration of mechanical stimulation with simultaneous fluorescence imaging by spinning-disk confocal and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy enabled visualization and quantification of molecular dynamic events at the sub-cellular level in real-time. Results provide evidence that the pre-existing cytoskeletal tension affects the actomyosin apparatus which in turn coordinates the ability of the cell to adapt to the externally applied stress. RhoA activation induced high cytoskeletal tension that correlated with increased stress fiber formation, cell stiffness, integrin activation and myosin phosphorylation. In contrast, blocking Rho-kinase or myosin function was characterized by low cytoskeletal tension with a decreased level of stress fiber formation, lower cell stiffness and integrin activation. Our findings show that VSMC sense and adapt to physical microenvironmental changes by a coordinated response of the actomyosin apparatus necessary to establish a new homeostatic state.<newchar><newabs>24074795<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is composed of highly variable and dynamic components that regulate cell behavior. The protein composition and physical properties of the ECM govern cell fate through biochemical and biomechanical mechanisms. This requires a carefully orchestrated and thorough regulation considering that a disturbed ECM can have serious consequences and lead to pathological conditions like cancer. In breast cancer, many ECM proteins are significantly deregulated and specific matrix components promote tumor progression and metastatic spread. Intriguingly, several ECM proteins that are associated with breast cancer development, overlap substantially with a group of ECM proteins induced during the state of tissue remodeling such as mammary gland involution. Fibrillar collagens, fibronectin, hyaluronan and matricellular proteins are matrix components that are common to both involution and cancer. Moreover, some of these proteins have in recent years been identified as important constituents of metastatic niches in breast cancer. In addition, specific ECM molecules, their receptors or enzymatic modifiers are significantly involved in resistance to therapeutic intervention. Further analysis of these ECM proteins and the downstream ECM mediated signaling pathways may provide a range of possibilities to identify druggable targets against advanced breast cancer.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Mammary gland involution<n-term>Metastatic breast cancer<n-term>Metastatic niche<n-term>Therapy resistance<n-term>Tissue remodeling<n-term><newabs>21967802<newchar>The immune response is an important determinant of the downstream remodeling of xenogeneic biologic scaffolds in vivo. Pro-inflammatory responses have been correlated with encapsulation and a foreign body reaction, while anti-inflammatory reactions are associated with constructive remodeling. However, the bioactive and bioinductive molecules within the extracellular matrix (ECM) that induce this polarization are unclear, although it is likely that cellular remnants such as damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) retained within the scaffold may play a role. The present study investigated the immunomodulatory effects of common ECM scaffolds. Results showed that tissue source, decellularization method and chemical crosslinking modifications affect the presence of the well characterized DAMP - HMGB1. In addition, these factors were correlated with differences in cell proliferation, death, secretion of the chemokines CCL2 and CCL4, and up regulation of the pro-inflammatory signaling receptor toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Inhibition of HMGB1 with glycyrrhizin increased the pro-inflammatory response, increasing cell death and up regulating chemokine and TLR4 mRNA expression. The present study suggests the importance of HMGB1 and other DAMPS as bioinductive molecules within the ECM scaffold. Identification and evaluation of other ECM bioactive molecules will be an area of future interest for new biomaterial development.<newchar><newabs>22012077<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts become activated and differentiate to smooth muscle-like myofibroblasts in response to hypertension and myocardial infarction (MI), resulting in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, scar formation and impaired cardiac function. cAMP and cGMP-dependent signaling have been implicated in cardiac fibroblast activation and ECM synthesis. Dysregulation of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity/expression is also associated with various diseases and several PDE inhibitors are currently available or in development for treating these pathological conditions. The objective of this study is to define and characterize the specific PDE isoform that is altered during cardiac fibroblast activation and functionally important for regulating myofibroblast activation and ECM synthesis. We have found that Ca(2+)/calmodulin-stimulated PDE1A isoform is specifically induced in activated cardiac myofibroblasts stimulated by Ang II and TGF-β in vitro as well as in vivo within fibrotic regions of mouse, rat, and human diseased hearts. Inhibition of PDE1A function via PDE1-selective inhibitor or PDE1A shRNA significantly reduced Ang II or TGF-β-induced myofibroblast activation, ECM synthesis, and pro-fibrotic gene expression in rat cardiac fibroblasts. Moreover, the PDE1 inhibitor attenuated isoproterenol-induced interstitial fibrosis in mice. Mechanistic studies revealed that PDE1A modulates unique pools of cAMP and cGMP, predominantly in perinuclear and nuclear regions of cardiac fibroblasts. Further, both cAMP-Epac-Rap1 and cGMP-PKG signaling was involved in PDE1A-mediated regulation of collagen synthesis. These results suggest that induction of PDE1A plays a critical role in cardiac fibroblast activation and cardiac fibrosis, and targeting PDE1A may lead to regression of the adverse cardiac remodeling associated with various cardiac diseases.<newchar><newabs>22961409<newchar>Encapsulations of cells in type-I collagen matrices are widely used three-dimensional (3D) in vitro models of wound healing and tissue morphogenesis and are common constructs for drug delivery and for in vivo implantation. As cells remodel the exogenous collagen scaffold, they also assemble a dense fibronectin (Fn) matrix that aids in tissue compaction; however, the spatio-temporal (re)organization of Fn and collagen in this setting has yet to be quantitatively investigated. Here, we utilized microfabricated tissue gauges (μTUGs) to guide the contraction of microscale encapsulations of fibroblasts within collagen gels. We combined this system with a Foerster Radius Energy Transfer (FRET) labeled biosensor of Fn conformation to probe the organization, conformation and remodeling of both the exogenous collagen and the cell-assembled Fn matrices. We show that within hours, compact Fn from culture media adsorbed to the collagen scaffold. Over the course of tissue remodeling, this Fn-coated collagen scaffold was compacted into a thin, sparsely populated core around which cells assembled a dense fibrillar Fn shell that was rich in both cell and plasma derived Fn. This resulted in two separate Fn populations with different conformations (compact/adsorbed and extended/fibrillar) in microtissues. Cell contractility and microtissue geometry cooperated to remodel these two populations, resulting in spatial gradients in Fn conformation. Together, these results highlight an important spatio-temporal interplay between two prominent extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules (Fn and collagen) and cellular traction forces, and will have implications for future studies of the force-mediated remodeling events that occur within collagen scaffolds either in 3D in vitro models or within surgical implants in vivo.<newchar><newabs>22519582<newchar>Fibroblasts as many other cells are known to form, contract, and remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM). The presented study aims to gain an insight into how mechanical boundary conditions affect the production of ECM components, their remodeling, and the feedback of the altered mechanical cell environment on these processes. The influence of cyclic mechanical loading (f=1 Hz, 10% axial compression) and scaffold stiffness (E=1.2 and 8.5 kPa) on the mechanical properties of fibroblast-seeded scaffold constructs were investigated in an in vitro approach over 14 days of culture. To do so, a newly developed bioreactor system was employed. While mechanical loading resulted in a clear upregulation of procollagen-I and fibronectin production, scaffold stiffness showed to primarily influence matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) secretion and cell-induced scaffold contraction. Higher stiffness of the collagen scaffolds resulted in an up to twofold higher production of collagen-degrading MMP-1. The changes of mechanical parameters like Young's modulus, maximum compression force, and elastic portion of compression force over time suggest that from initially distinct mechanical starting conditions (scaffold stiffness), the construct's mechanical properties converge over time. As a consequence of mechanical loading a shift toward higher construct stiffness was observed. The results suggest that scaffold stiffness has only a temporary effect on cell behavior, while the impact of mechanical loading is preserved over time. Thus, it is concluded that the mechanical environment of the cell after remodeling is depending on mechanical loading rather than on initial scaffold stiffness.<newchar><newabs>25532934<newchar>Desmosplasia is a characteristic of most solid tumors and leads to fibrosis through abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, remodeling, and posttranslational modifications. The resulting stiff tumor stroma not only compromises vascular integrity to induce hypoxia and impede drug delivery, but also promotes aggressiveness by potentiating the activity of key growth, invasion, and survival pathways. Intriguingly, many of the protumorigenic signaling pathways that are mechanically activated by ECM stiffness also promote glucose uptake and aerobic glycolysis, and an altered metabolism is a recognized hallmark of cancer. Indeed, emerging evidence suggests that metabolic alterations and an abnormal ECM may cooperatively drive cancer cell aggression and treatment resistance. Accordingly, improved methods to monitor tissue mechanics and metabolism promise to improve diagnostics and treatments to ameliorate ECM stiffening and elevated mechanosignaling may improve patient outcome. Here we discuss the interplay between ECM mechanics and metabolism in tumor biology and suggest that monitoring these processes and targeting their regulatory pathways may improve diagnostics, therapy, and the prevention of malignant transformation.<newchar>Cancer<n-term>ECM stiffness<n-term>Free radicals<n-term>Mechanosignaling<n-term>Tumor metabolism<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>23332229<newchar>A constitutive model for a fiber reinforced hyperelastic material was applied to understand arterial fiber remodeling in a sheep model of Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR). IUGR is associated altered hemodynamics characterized by increased resistance to blood flow in the placenta and elevated fetal arterial pressure and pulsatility. The constitutive model describes the collagen contribution to the mechanics within the arterial wall in both control and IUGR carotid artery through defining the material modulus and the orientation of the microstructure. A sheep model of placental insufficiency induced IUGR (PI-IUGR) was created by exposure of the pregnant ewe to elevated ambient temperatures. Experimental data was collected using pressure-diameter measurements to measure passive compliance in control and PI-IUGR carotid arteries. The constitutive model was optimized to fit the experimental data predicting the material parameters. Specifically, the collagen fiber predicted angle (γ) in the control artery was 49.9° from the circumferential axis while the PI-IUGR was 16.6° with a 23.5% increase in fiber orientation (κ). Quantitative assessment of collagen fiber orientation in secondary harmonic generation images confirmed the shift in orientation between the two groups. Together these suggest vascular remodeling of the ECM fiber orientation plays a major role in arterial stiffening in the PI-IUGR near-term fetal sheep.<newchar><newabs>22990282<newchar>An integrative cell migration model incorporating focal adhesion (FA) dynamics, cytoskeleton and nucleus remodeling and actin motor activity is developed for predicting cell migration behaviors on 3-dimensional curved surfaces, such as cylindrical lumens in the 3-D extracellular matrix (ECM). The work is motivated by 3-D microfluidic migration experiments suggesting that the migration speed and direction may vary depending on the cross sectional shape of the lumen along which the cell migrates. In this paper, the mechanical structure of the cell is modeled as double elastic membranes of cell and nucleus. The two elastic membranes are connected by stress fibers, which are extended from focal adhesions on the cell surface to the nuclear membrane. The cell deforms and gains traction as transmembrane integrins distributed over the outer cell membrane bind to ligands on the ECM, form focal adhesions, and activate stress fibers. Probabilities at which integrin ligand-receptor bonds are formed as well as ruptures are affected by the surface geometry, resulting in diverse migration behaviors that depend on the curvature of the surface. Monte Carlo simulations of the integrative model reveal that (a) the cell migration speed is dependent on the cross sectional area of the lumen with a maximum speed at a particular diameter or width, (b) as the lumen diameter increases, the cell tends to spread and migrate around the circumference of the lumen, while it moves in the longitudinal direction as the lumen diameter narrows, (c) once the cell moves in one direction, it tends to stay migrating in the same direction despite the stochastic nature of migration. The relationship between the cell migration speed and the lumen width agrees with microfluidic experimental data for cancer cell migration.<newchar><newabs>26686988<newchar>The heart's reaction to ischemic injury from a myocardial infarction involves complex cross-talk between the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) and different cell types within the myocardium. The ECM functions not only as a scaffold where myocytes beat synchronously, but an active signaling environment that regulates the important post-MI responses. The thrombospondins are matricellular proteins that modulate cell--ECM interactions, functioning as &quot;sensors&quot; that mediate outside-in and inside-out signaling. Thrombospondins are highly expressed during embryonic stages, and although their levels decrease during adult life, can be re-expressed in high quantities in response to cardiac stress including myocardial infarction and heart failure. Like a Swiss-army knife, the thrombospondins possess many tools: numerous binding domains that allow them to interact with other elements of the ECM, cell surface receptors, and signaling molecules. It is through these that the thrombospondins function. In the present review, we provide basic as well as clinical evidence linking the thrombospondin proteins with the post myocardial infarction response, including inflammation, fibrotic matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, as well as myocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis, and contractile dysfunction in heart failure. We will describe what is known regarding the intracellular signaling pathways that are involved with these responses, paving the road for future studies identifying these proteins as therapeutic targets for cardiac disease.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>Heart failure<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term>Remodeling<n-term>TGFβ<n-term>Thrombospondin<n-term><newabs>25482625<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) provides both structural support and contextual information to cells within tissues and organs. The combination of biochemical and biomechanical signals from the ECM modulates responses to extracellular signals toward differentiation, proliferation, or apoptosis; alterations in the ECM are necessary for development and remodeling processes, but aberrations in the composition and organization of ECM are associated with disease pathology and can predispose to development of cancer. The primary cell surface sensors of the ECM are the integrins, which provide the physical connection between the ECM and the cytoskeleton and also convey biochemical information about the composition of the ECM. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) is an extracellular signaling molecule that is a powerful controller of a variety of cellular functions, and that has been found to induce very different outcomes according to cell type and cellular context. It is becoming clear that ECM-mediated signaling through integrins is reciprocally influenced by TGF-β: integrin expression, activation, and responses are affected by cellular exposure to TGF-β, and TGF-β activation and cellular responses are in turn controlled by signaling from the ECM through integrins. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a physiological process that is activated by TGF-β in normal development and in cancer, is also affected by the composition and structure of the ECM. Here, we will outline how signaling from the ECM controls the contextual response to TGF-β, and how this response is selectively modulated during disease, with an emphasis on recent findings, current challenges, and future opportunities.<newchar>EMT<n-term>TGFβ<n-term>cancer<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>integrins<n-term><newabs>23533576<newchar>When vein segments are implanted into the arterial system for use in arterial bypass grafting, adaptation to the higher pressure and flow of the arterial system is accomplished thorough wall thickening and expansion. These early remodeling events have been found to be closely coupled to the local hemodynamic forces, such as shear stress and wall tension, and are believed to be the foundation for later vein graft failure. To further our mechanistic understanding of the cellular and extracellular interactions that lead to global changes in tissue architecture, a rule-based modeling method is developed through the application of basic rules of behaviors for these molecular and cellular activities. In the current method, smooth muscle cell (SMC), extracellular matrix (ECM), and monocytes are selected as the three components that occupy the elements of a grid system that comprise the developing vein graft intima. The probabilities of the cellular behaviors are developed based on data extracted from in vivo experiments. At each time step, the various probabilities are computed and applied to the SMC and ECM elements to determine their next physical state and behavior. One- and two-dimensional models are developed to test and validate the computational approach. The importance of monocyte infiltration, and the associated effect in augmenting extracellular matrix deposition, was evaluated and found to be an important component in model development. Final model validation is performed using an independent set of experiments, where model predictions of intimal growth are evaluated against experimental data obtained from the complex geometry and shear stress patterns offered by a mid-graft focal stenosis, where simulation results show good agreements with the experimental data.<newchar><newabs>23777917<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are commonly used to facilitate a constructive remodeling response in several types of tissue, including the esophagus. Surgical manipulation of the esophagus is often complicated by stricture, but preclinical and clinical studies have shown that the use of an ECM scaffold can mitigate stricture and promote a constructive outcome after resection of full circumference esophageal mucosa. Recognizing the potential benefits of ECM derived from homologous tissue (i.e., site-specific ECM), the objective of the present study was to prepare, characterize, and assess the in-vivo remodeling properties of ECM from porcine esophageal mucosa. The developed protocol for esophageal ECM preparation is compliant with previously established criteria of decellularization and results in a scaffold that maintains important biologic components and an ultrastructure consistent with a basement membrane complex. Perivascular stem cells remained viable when seeded upon the esophageal ECM scaffold in-vitro, and the in-vivo host response showed a pattern of constructive remodeling when implanted in soft tissue.<newchar><newabs>24367771<newchar>We characterized the effect of ciprofloxacin (CPX) in cultured human tenocytes by morphological and molecular methods. Collagen type I and III mRNA and protein levels were unaffected, but lysyl hydroxylase 2b mRNA levels progressively decreased after CPX administration. MMP-1 protein levels significantly increased after 20 μg/ml CPX administration but remained unmodified at the higher dose, whilst MMP-2 activity was unchanged. Tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP-1) gene expression decreased after CPX treatment, whilst TIMP-2 and transforming growth factor-β1 gene expression, the cytoskeleton arrangement, and cytochrome c expression remained unmodified. Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine mRNA and protein levels remained almost unchanged, whilst N-cadherin mRNA levels resulted significantly down-regulated and connexin 43 gene expression tended to decrease after CPX administration. The CPX-induced decreased ability to cross-link collagen and decreased TIMP-1 levels, possibly leading to higher activity of MMPs in ECM degradation, together with the down-regulation of N-cadherin and connexin 43 are consistent with a reduced ability to maintain tissue homeostasis, possibly making the tendon more susceptible to rupture.<newchar>ciprofloxacin<n-term>collagen turnover<n-term>extra-cellular matrix remodelling<n-term>tendons<n-term>tenocytes<n-term><newabs>24302007<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in the maintenance of white adipose tissue (WAT) architecture and function, and proper ECM remodeling is critical to support WAT malleability to accommodate changes in energy storage needs. Obesity and adipocyte hypertrophy place a strain on the ECM remodeling machinery, which may promote disordered ECM and altered tissue integrity and could promote proinflammatory and cell stress signals. To explore these questions, new methods were developed to quantify omental and subcutaneous WAT tensile strength and WAT collagen content by three-dimensional confocal imaging, using collagen VI knockout mice as a methods validation tool. These methods, combined with comprehensive measurement of WAT ECM proteolytic enzymes, transcript, and blood analyte analyses, were used to identify unique pathophenotypes of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes mellitus in obese women, using multivariate statistical modeling and univariate comparisons with weight-matched healthy obese individuals. In addition to the expected differences in inflammation and glycemic control, approximately 20 ECM-related factors, including omental tensile strength, collagen, and enzyme transcripts, helped discriminate metabolically compromised obesity. This is consistent with the hypothesis that WAT ECM physiology is intimately linked to metabolic health in obese humans, and the studies provide new tools to explore this relationship.<newchar>adipose inflammation<n-term>bariatric surgery<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>type 2 diabetes mellitus<n-term><newabs>25906317<newchar>Combination regimens of Bifidobacterium infantis and Lactobacillus acidophilus have been demonstrated to prevent necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) in clinical trials. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for this protective effect are not well understood. Additionally, conditioned media from individual cultures of these two probiotics show strain specific modulation of inflammation using in vitro human intestinal NEC models. Here we report a transcription profiling analysis of gene expression in immature human fetal intestinal epithelial cells (H4 cells) pretreated with conditioned media from B. infantis (BCM) or L. acidophilus (LCM) prior to IL-1β stimulation. Compared with control media, the two probiotic-conditioned media (PCM) treatments altered the expression of hundreds of genes involved in the immune response, apoptosis and cell survival, cell adhesion, the cell cycle, development and angiogenesis. In IL-1β-stimulated cells, PCM treatment decreased the upregulation of genes in the NF-κB activation pathway and downregulated genes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Compared with LCM, BCM showed more significant modulatory effects on ECM remodeling, reflected by a lower p value. IL-6 and IL-8 production was significantly reduced in IL-1β-stimulated cells pretreated with PCM (p&lt;0.05), which was consistent with their altered gene expression. Western blot analysis showed that compared with IL-1β stimulation alone, PCM treatment attenuated the decrease of cytoplasmic IκBα and NF-κB p65 levels as well as the increase of nuclear NF-κB p65 levels in the stimulated cells (p&lt;0.05). In conclusion, PCM treatment exerted anti-inflammatory effects in immature human fetal enterocytes primarily by modulating genes in the NF-κB signaling and ECM remodeling pathways. Additionally, some components of these signaling pathways, particularly the ECM remodeling pathway, were more profoundly affected by BCM than LCM.<newchar><newabs>19559709<newchar>The concept that extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover occurs during cardiac remodeling is a well-accepted paradigm. To date, a multitude of studies document that remodeling is accompanied by increases in the synthesis and deposition of ECM components as well as increases in extracellular proteases, especially matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which break down ECM components. Further, soluble ECM fragments generated from enzymatic action serve to stimulate cell behavior and have been proposed as candidate plasma biomarkers of cardiac remodeling. This review briefly summarizes our current knowledge base on cardiac ECM turnover following myocardial infarction (MI), but more importantly extends discussion by defining avenues that remain to be explored to drive the ECM remodeling field forward. Specifically, this review will discuss cause and effect roles for the ECM changes observed following MI and the potential role of the ECM changes that may serve as trigger points to regulate remodeling. While the pattern of remodeling following MI is qualitatively similar but quantitatively different from various types of injury, the basic theme in remodeling is repeated. Therefore, while we use the MI model as the prototype injury model, the themes discussed here are also relevant to cardiac remodeling due to other types of injury.<newchar><newabs>22264525<newchar>Biologic scaffolds prepared from the extracellular matrix (ECM) of decellularized mammalian tissues have been shown to facilitate constructive remodeling in injured tissues such as skeletal muscle, the esophagus, and lower urinary tract, among others. The ECM of every tissue has a unique composition and structure that likely has direct effects on the host response and it is plausible that ECM harvested from a given tissue would provide distinct advantages over ECM harvested from nonhomologous tissues. For example, a tissue specific muscle ECM scaffold may be more suitable for constructive remodeling of skeletal muscle than non-homologous ECM tissue sources. The present study describes an enzymatic and chemical decellularization process for isolating skeletal muscle ECM scaffolds using established decellularization criteria and characterized the structure and chemical composition of the resulting ECM. The results were compared to those from a non-muscle ECM derived from small intestine (SIS). Muscle ECM was shown to contain growth factors, glycosaminoglycans, and basement membrane structural proteins which differed from those present in SIS. Myogenic cells survived and proliferated on muscle ECM scaffolds in vitro, and when implanted in a rat abdominal wall injury model in vivo was shown to induce a constructive remodeling response associated with scaffold degradation and myogenesis in the implant area; however, the remodeling outcome did not differ from that induced by SIS by 35 days post surgery. These results suggest that superior tissue remodeling outcomes are not universally dependent upon homologous tissue derived ECM scaffold materials.<newchar><newabs>26778458<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex and dynamic scaffold that maintains tissue structure and dynamics. However, the view of the ECM as an inert architectural support has been increasingly challenged. The ECM is a vibrant meshwork, a crucial organizer of cellular microenvironments. It plays a direct role in cellular interactions regulating cell growth, survival, spreading, proliferation, differentiation and migration through the intricate relationship among cellular and acellular tissue components. This complex interrelationship preserves cardiac function during homeostasis; however it is also responsible for pathologic remodeling following myocardial injury. Therefore, enhancing our understanding of this cross-talk may provide mechanistic insights into the pathogenesis of heart failure and suggest new approaches to novel, targeted pharmacologic therapies. This review explores the implications of ECM-cell interactions in myocardial cell behavior and cardiac function at baseline and following myocardial injury.<newchar>Cardiac remodeling<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibroblast<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term><newabs>24577970<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) provides the architectural scaffold to support efficient contraction and relaxation of cardiomyocytes. The elegant design of the ECM facilitates optimal force transduction, electric transmission, intercellular communication, and metabolic exchange within the myocardial microenvironment. In the setting of increased wall stress, injury, or disease, the ECM can undergo a series of dynamic changes that lead to favorable chamber remodeling and functional adaptation. Over time, sustained matrix remodeling can impair diastolic and systolic function caused by excess deposition of interstitial fibrous tissue. These pathological alterations in ECM structure/function are considered central to the evolution of adverse cardiac remodeling and the development of heart failure. This review discusses the complex dynamics of the cardiac ECM in the setting of myocardial infarction, pressure overload, and volume overload. We also summarize the current status of ECM biomarkers that may have clinical value in prognosticating cardiac disease progression in patients. Finally, we discuss the most current status of drugs under evaluation for use in cardiac fibrosis.<newchar>biological marker<n-term>collagen<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term><newabs>24894149<newchar>The ability of bone to resist fracture is determined by the combination of bone mass and bone quality. Like bone mass, bone quality is carefully regulated. Of the many aspects of bone quality, this review focuses on biological mechanisms that control the material quality of the bone extracellular matrix (ECM). Bone ECM quality depends upon ECM composition and organization. Proteins and signaling pathways that affect the mineral or organic constituents of bone ECM impact bone ECM material properties, such as elastic modulus and hardness. These properties are also sensitive to pathways that regulate bone remodeling by osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and osteocytes. Several extracellular proteins, signaling pathways, intracellular effectors, and transcription regulatory networks have been implicated in the control of bone ECM quality. A molecular understanding of these mechanisms will elucidate the biological control of bone quality and suggest new targets for the development of therapies to prevent bone fragility.<newchar><newabs>19577253<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) have been used to facilitate the constructive remodeling of several tissue types. Previous studies suggest that the ECM scaffold remodeling process is dependent on microenvironmental factors, including tissue-specific biomechanical loading. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effects of long-term catheterization (LTC), with its associated inhibition of bladder filling and physiologic biomechanical loading, on ECM scaffold remodeling following partial cystectomy in a canine model. Reconstruction of the partial cystectomy site was performed using ECM scaffolds prepared from porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) or porcine urinary bladder matrix (UBM). Animals were randomly assigned to either a long-term catheterization (LTC) group (n=5, catheterized 28 d) or a short-term catheterization group (STC, n=5, catheterized 24 h), and scaffold remodeling was assessed by histologic methods at 4 and 12 wk postoperatively. By 4 wk, animals in the STC group showed a well-developed and highly differentiated urothelium, a robust vascularization network, abundant smooth muscle actin (SMA), and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (smMHC) expressing spindle-shaped cells, and many neuronal processes associated with newly formed arterioles. In contrast, at 4 wk the scaffolds in LTC animals were not epithelialized, and did not express neuronal markers. The scaffolds in the LTC group developed a dense granulation tissue containing SMA+, smMHC-, spindle-shaped cells that were morphologically and phenotypically consistent with myofibroblasts, but not smooth muscle cells. By 12 wk postoperatively, the ECM scaffolds in the STC animals showed a constructive remodeling response, with a differentiated urothelium and islands of smooth muscle cells within the remodeled scaffold. In contrast, at 12 wk the scaffolds in LTC animals had a remodeling response more consistent with fibrosis even though catheters had been removed 8 wk earlier. These findings show that early exposure of site-appropriate mechanical loading (i.e., bladder filling) mediates a constructive remodeling response after ECM repair in a canine partial cystectomy model.<newchar><newabs>22820459<newchar>Cell-based therapy has emerged as a treatment modality for myocardial repair. Especially cardiac resident stem cells are considered a potential cell source since they are able to differentiate into cardiomyocytes and have improved heart function after injury in a preclinical model for myocardial infarction. To avoid or repair myocardial damage it is important not only to replace the lost cardiomyocytes, but also to remodel and replace the scar tissue by &quot;healthy&quot; extracellular matrix (ECM). Interestingly, the role of cardiac stem cells in this facet of cardiac repair is largely unknown. Therefore, we investigated the expression and production of ECM proteins, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs) in human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells (CMPCs) undergoing differentiation towards the cardiomyogenic lineage. Our data suggest that CMPCs have the capacity to synthesize and modulate their own matrix environment, especially during differentiation towards the cardiomyogenic lineage. While undifferentiated CMPCs expressed collagen I, III, IV and fibronectin, but no elastin, during the process of differentiation the expression of collagen I, III, IV and fibronectin increased and interestingly also elastin expression was induced. Furthermore, undifferentiated CMPCs express MMP-1 -2 and -9 and upon differentiation the expression of MMP-1 decreased, while the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9, although the latter only in the early stage of differentiation, increased. Additionally, the expression of TIMP-1, -2 and -4 was induced during differentiation. This study provides new insights into the matrix production and remodeling capacity of human CMPCs, with potential beneficial effects for the treatment of cardiac injury.<newchar><newabs>21919798<newchar>Patients with small caliber artery disorders, often lack the suitable autologous tissue needed for bypassing diseased vessels or for other vascular reconstructive procedures. We propose to decellularize small caliber porcine carotid artery, then recellularize it with vascular cells and function as scaffold for tissue engineering vascular graft replacements. Based on a modified decellularization method developed in our laboratory, the cellular contents of small caliber (&lt;4 mm) arteries were carefully removed using an enzymatic and detergent decellularization procedure. Decellularization efficiency was evaluated using histology and scanning electron microscopy, which demonstrated the absence of cellular remains in the artery wall. Proteomic analysis of the scaffold revealed that the decellularized vessels retained their major extracellular matrix protein composition. Mechanical analyses revealed no significant change in the extracellular matrix (ECM) properties versus the native artery. The decellularized artery was reseeded with human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and cultured under static or dynamic conditions in a perfusion bioreactor designed and developed in our laboratory for these studies. Dynamic co-culturing of SMC and HUVEC, in this custom-made perfusion bioreactor, led to a higher infiltration, migration and proliferation of SMC toward the media and to a more confluent endothelium formation on the luminal surface when compared with static culturing. In addition, vascular media remodeling by SMC correlated to the expression of remodeling related genes assessed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and HUVEC cultivation contributed to the remodeling of several basement membrane proteins stained using immunohistochemistry. All together, these findings indicate the potential of such decellularized arterial ECM for future small caliber vascular graft reconstruction therapies.<newchar><newabs>22019897<newchar>The transglutaminase-mediated, covalent cross-linking of proteins is an essential step in tissue remodeling after injury. This process provides tissues with extra rigidity and resistance against proteolytic degradation. Plasma coagulation factor XIII (FXIII) is a transglutaminase that promotes cross-linking of the extracellular matrix (ECM) components fibrin and fibronectin to form a provisional matrix in response to tissue damage. However, the functional requirement for this FXIII-mediated cross-linked provisional matrix in adult tissue remodeling remains to be defined. Although it has been proposed that the formation FXIII-mediated fibrin-fibronectin provisional matrix is a critical step for ECM remodeling, we show in an FXIII subunit A-deficient murine model of acute liver injury that the lack of FXIII subunit A did not interfere with collagen reconstruction and resolution after liver injury. Furthermore, FXIIIA deficiency caused significantly increased hepatocyte apoptosis and a delay in hepatocyte regeneration after injury, which were accompanied by a significantly high induction of p53 expression. These findings suggest novel functions of FXIII that the FXIII-mediated covalently cross-linked matrix could promote survival signals for hepatocytes in adult tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26055347<newchar>While it has become axiomatic that mechanical signals promote in vitro engineered tissue formation, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Moreover, efforts to date to determine parameters for optimal extracellular matrix (ECM) development have been largely empirical. In the present work, we propose a two-pronged approach involving novel theoretical developments coupled with key experimental data to develop better mechanistic understanding of growth and development of dense connective tissue under mechanical stimuli. To describe cellular proliferation and ECM synthesis that occur at rates of days to weeks, we employ mixture theory to model the construct constituents as a nutrient-cell-ECM triphasic system, their transport, and their biochemical reactions. Dynamic conditioning protocols with frequencies around 1 Hz are described with multi-scale methods to couple the dissimilar time scales. Enhancement of nutrient transport due to pore fluid advection is upscaled into the growth model, and the spatially dependent ECM distribution describes the evolving poroelastic characteristics of the scaffold-engineered tissue construct. Simulation results compared favorably to the existing experimental data, and most importantly, distinguish between static and dynamic conditioning regimes. The theoretical framework for mechanically conditioned tissue engineering (TE) permits not only the formulation of novel and better-informed mechanistic hypothesis describing the phenomena underlying TE growth and development, but also the exploration/optimization of conditioning protocols in a rational manner.<newchar>Functional tissue engineering<n-term>Growth and remodeling<n-term>Heart valve<n-term>Multi-scale modeling<n-term>Poroelasticity<n-term>Reaction-diffusion<n-term><newabs>24278882<newchar>Aging is characterized by a progressive impairment of (a) cardiac structure including fibrosis and cardiomyocyte density, and (b) cardiac function including stroke volume, ejection fraction, and cardiac output. The cardiac remodeling involves loss of cardiac myocytes, reactive hypertrophy of the remaining cells, and increased extracellular matrix (ECM) and fibrosis in the aging heart, especially left ventricles. Fibrosis (i.e., accumulation of collagen) with aging is very critical in impairing cardiac function associated with increased myocardial stiffness. The balance of ECM remodeling via ECM synthesis and degradation is essential for normal cardiac structure and function. Thus an understanding of upstream ECM regulatory factors such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and myofibroblasts is necessary for gaining new insights into managing cardiac remodeling and dysfunction with aging. In contrast, exercise training effectively improves cardiac function in both young and older individuals. Exercise training also improves maximal cardiovascular function by increasing stroke volume and cardiac output. However, limited data indicate that exercise training might attenuate collagen content and remodeling in the aging heart. We recently found that 12 weeks of exercise training protected against geometric changes of collagen ECM in the aging heart and ameliorated age-associated dysregulation of ECM in the heart, as indicated by up-regulation of active MMPs as well as down-regulation of TIMPs and TGF-β. This review will provide a summary and discussion of aging and exercise effects on fibrosis and upstream regulators of ECM in the heart.<newchar>Aging<n-term>Collagen<n-term>Exercise<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Heart<n-term><newabs>24021482<newchar>Zebrafish gastrulation cell movements occur in the context of dynamic changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and require the concerted action of planar cell polarity (PCP) proteins that regulate cell elongation and mediolateral alignment. Data obtained using Xenopus laevis gastrulae have shown that integrin-fibronectin interactions underlie the formation of polarized cell protrusions necessary for PCP and have implicated PCP proteins themselves as regulators of ECM. By contrast, the relationship between establishment of PCP and ECM assembly/remodeling during zebrafish gastrulation is unclear. We previously showed that zebrafish embryos carrying a null mutation in the four-pass transmembrane PCP protein vang-like 2 (vangl2) exhibit increased matrix metalloproteinase activity and decreased immunolabeling of fibronectin. These data implicated for the first time a core PCP protein in the regulation of pericellular proteolysis of ECM substrates and raised the question of whether other zebrafish PCP proteins also impact ECM organization. In Drosophila melanogaster, the cytoplasmic PCP protein Prickle binds Van Gogh and regulates its function. Here we report that similar to vangl2, loss of zebrafish prickle1a decreases fibronectin protein levels in gastrula embryos. We further show that Prickle1a physically binds Vangl2 and regulates both the subcellular distribution and total protein level of Vangl2. These data suggest that the ability of Prickle1a to impact fibronectin organization is at least partly due to effects on Vangl2. In contrast to loss of either Vangl2 or Prickle1a function, we find that glypican4 (a Wnt co-receptor) and frizzled7 mutant gastrula embryos with disrupted non-canonical Wnt signaling exhibit the opposite phenotype, namely increased fibronectin assembly. Our data show that glypican4 mutants do not have decreased proteolysis of ECM substrates, but instead have increased cell surface cadherin protein expression and increased intercellular adhesion. These data indicate that Wnt/Glypican4/Frizzled signaling regulates ECM assembly through effects on cadherin-mediated cell cohesion. Together, our results demonstrate that zebrafish Vangl2/Prickle1a and non-canonical Wnt/Frizzled signaling have opposing effects on ECM organization underlying PCP and gastrulation cell movements.<newchar>Cadherins<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Gastrulation<n-term>Metalloproteinases<n-term>Polarity<n-term>Zebrafish<n-term><newabs>24992633<newchar>Reversible changes in lung microstructure accompany lung inflammation, although alterations in tissue micromechanics and their impact on inflammation remain unknown. This study investigated changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and tissue stiffness in a model of LPS-induced inflammation and examined the role of lipoxin analog 15-epi-lipoxin A4 (eLXA4) in the reduction of stiffness-dependent exacerbation of the inflammatory process. Atomic force microscopy measurements of live lung slices were used to directly measure local tissue stiffness changes induced by intratracheal injection of LPS. Effects of LPS on ECM properties and inflammatory response were evaluated in an animal model of LPS-induced lung injury, live lung tissue slices, and pulmonary endothelial cell (EC) culture. In vivo, LPS increased perivascular stiffness in lung slices monitored by atomic force microscopy and stimulated expression of ECM proteins fibronectin, collagen I, and ECM crosslinker enzyme, lysyl oxidase. Increased stiffness and ECM remodeling escalated LPS-induced VCAM1 and ICAM1 expression and IL-8 production by lung ECs. Stiffness-dependent exacerbation of inflammatory signaling was confirmed in pulmonary ECs grown on substrates with high and low stiffness. eLXA4 inhibited LPS-increased stiffness in lung cross sections, attenuated stiffness-dependent enhancement of EC inflammatory activation, and restored lung compliance in vivo. This study shows that increased local vascular stiffness exacerbates lung inflammation. Attenuation of local stiffening of lung vasculature represents a novel mechanism of lipoxin antiinflammatory action.<newchar>endothelium<n-term>lipoxin<n-term>lung inflammation<n-term>stiffness<n-term>vascular leak<n-term><newabs>23597203<newchar>The specific organization of the tumor extracellular matrix (ECM) is an intrinsic and basic step in the convoluted pathways of tumorigenesis. Fibrosarcoma is a rare, lethal, malignant tumor originating from fibroblasts, characterized by the formation of an abundant ECM. Fibroblastoid cells undergoing malignant transformation specifically alter composition and organization of their ECM to facilitate growth, survival and invasion. Fibrosarcoma cells were shown to have a high content and turnover of ECM components including hyaluronan, proteoglycans, collagens, fibronectin and laminin. Cell signaling by endogenous growth factors, such as TGF&amp;#946;, EGF, FGF2, VEGF and IFG-I, is directly correlated to ECM remodeling, stroma formation and fibrosarcoma progression. In this regard, growth factors affect the expression of matrix macromolecules, such as secreted and cell-associated proteoglycans, hyaluronan and its receptors CD44 and RHAMM, as well as the expression and activity of matrix- degrading metalloproteinases, which are of critical importance in tissue remodeling and fibrosarcoma progression. Therefore, therapeutic approaches considering growth factors and their receptors as well as downstream signaling in human cancers may well be pharmacological targets being currently explored. In this article, we focus on growth factor signaling regulating fibrosarcoma cell ECM organization at the level of deposition and degradation of ECM macromolecules, the relation of ECM remodeling with fibrosarcoma cell malignant behaviour as well as the putative strategies for its therapeutic intervention.<newchar><newabs>23152884<newchar>In asymptomatic subjects B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes even at levels well below contemporary thresholds used for the diagnosis of heart failure. The mechanisms behind these observations are unclear. We examined the hypothesis that in an asymptomatic hypertensive population BNP would be associated with sub-clinical evidence of cardiac remodeling, inflammation and extracellular matrix (ECM) alterations. We performed transthoracic echocardiography and sampled coronary sinus (CS) and peripheral serum from patients with low (n = 14) and high BNP (n = 27). Peripheral BNP was closely associated with CS levels (r = 0.92, p&lt;0.001). CS BNP correlated significantly with CS levels of markers of collagen type I and III turnover including: PINP (r = 0.44, p = 0.008), CITP (r = 0.35, p = 0.03) and PIIINP (r = 0.35, p = 0.001), and with CS levels of inflammatory cytokines including: TNF-α (r = 0.49, p = 0.002), IL-6 (r = 0.35, p = 0.04), and IL-8 (r = 0.54, p&lt;0.001). The high BNP group had greater CS expression of fibro-inflammatory biomarkers including: CITP (3.8±0.7 versus 5.1±1.9, p = 0.007), TNF-α (3.2±0.5 versus 3.7±1.1, p = 003), IL-6 (1.9±1.3 versus 3.4±2.7, p = 0.02) and hsCRP (1.2±1.1 versus 2.4±1.1, p = 0.04), and greater left ventricular mass index (97±20 versus 118±26 g/m(2), p = 0.03) and left atrial volume index (18±2 versus 21±4, p = 0.008). Our data provide insight into the mechanisms behind the observed negative prognostic impact of modest elevations in BNP and suggest that in an asymptomatic hypertensive cohort a peripheral BNP measurement may be a useful marker of an early, sub-clinical pathological process characterized by cardiac remodeling, inflammation and ECM alterations.<newchar><newabs>21574862<newchar>Changes in the expression of genes implicated in oxidative stress and in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and selected protein expression profiles in mouse skin were examined after exposure to low-dose-rate or high-dose-rate photon irradiation. ICR mice received whole-body γ rays to total doses of 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 1 Gy at dose rates of 50 cGy/h or 50 cGy/min. Skin tissues were harvested for characterization at 4 h after irradiation. For oxidative stress after low-dose-rate exposure, 0.25, 0.5 and 1 Gy significantly altered 27, 23 and 25 genes, respectively, among 84 genes assessed (P &lt; 0.05). At doses as low as 0.25 Gy, many genes responsible for regulating the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were significantly altered, with changes &gt;2-fold compared to 0 Gy. For an ECM profile, 18-20 out of 84 genes were significantly up- or downregulated after low-dose-rate exposure. After high-dose-rate irradiation, of 84 genes associated with oxidative stress, 16, 22 and 22 genes were significantly affected after 0.25, 0.5 and 1 Gy, respectively. Compared to low-dose-rate radiation, high-dose-rate exposure resulted in different ECM gene expression profiles. The most striking changes after low-dose-rate or high-dose-rate exposure on ECM profiles were on genes encoding matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), e.g., Mmp2 and Mmp15 for low dose rate and Mmp9 and Mmp11 for high dose rate. Immunostaining for MMP-2 and MMP-9 proteins showed radiation dose rate-dependent differences. These data revealed that exposure to low total doses with low-dose-rate or high-dose-rate photon radiation induced oxidative stress and ECM-associated alterations in gene expression profiles. The expression of many genes was differentially regulated by different total dose and/or dose-rate regimens.<newchar><newabs>24913441<newchar>In the context of skeletal tissue development and repair, endochondral ossification has inspired a new approach to regenerate bone tissue in vivo using a cartilage intermediate as an osteoinductive template. The aim of this study was to investigate the behavior of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in regard to in vitro cartilage formation and in vivo bone regeneration when combined with different three-dimensional (3D) scaffold materials, i.e., hydroxyapatite/tricalcium phosphate (HA/TCP) composite block, polyurethane (PU) foam, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)/poly(ε-caprolactone) electrospun fibers (PLGA/PCL) and collagen I gel. To this end, rat MSCs were seeded on these scaffolds and chondrogenically differentiated in vitro for 4 weeks followed by in vivo subcutaneous implantation for 8 weeks. Nonetheless, the quality and maturity of in vivo ectopic bone formation appeared to be scaffold/material-dependent. Eight weeks of implantation was not sufficient to ossify the entire PLGA/PCL constructs, albeit a comprehensive remodeling of the cartilage had occurred. For HA/TCP, PU and collagen I scaffolds, more mature bone formation with rich vascularity and marrow stroma development could be observed. These data suggest that chondrogenic priming of MSCs in the presence of different scaffold materials allows the establishment of reliable templates for generating functional endochondral bone tissue in vivo without using osteoinductive growth factors. The morphology and maturity of bone formation.<newchar><newabs>22528876<newchar>Lysyl oxidase (LOX) family oxidases, LOX and LOXL1-4, oxidize lysine residues in collagens and elastin, resulting in the covalent crosslinking and stabilization of these extracellular matrix (ECM) structural components, thus provide collagen and elastic fibers much of their tensile strength and structural integrity. Abnormality in LOX expression and/or activity results in connective tissue disorders and fibrotic diseases. Despite LOX family oxidases have been reported to function as tumor suppressors, recent studies have highlighted the roles of LOX family oxidases in promoting cancer metastasis. LOX family oxidases are highly expressed in invasive tumors, and are closely associated with metastasis and poor patient outcome. Consistent to their roles in connective tissue homeostasis, LOX family oxidases expedite tumorigenesis and metastasis through active remodeling of tumor microenvironment. LOX family oxidases are also actively involved in the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), an event critical in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. In this review, we will summarize the recent progress on LOX family oxidases, with much of the focus on the roles and mechanism of LOX in tumor progression and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>23060953<newchar>Understanding how planar cell polarity (PCP) is established, maintained, and coordinated in migrating cell populations is an important area of research with implications for both embryonic morphogenesis and tumor cell invasion. We recently reported that the PCP protein Vang-like 2 (VANGL2) regulates the endocytosis and cell surface level of membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP14 or MT1-MMP). Here, we further discuss these findings in terms of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, cell migration, and zebrafish gastrulation. We also demonstrate that VANGL2 function impacts the focal degradation of ECM by human cancer cells including the formation or stability of invadopodia. Together, our findings implicate MMP14 as a downstream effector of VANGL2 signaling and suggest a model whereby the regulation of pericellular proteolysis is a fundamental aspect of PCP in migrating cells.<newchar>MMP14/MT1-MMP<n-term>VANGL2<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>gastrulation<n-term>invadopodia<n-term>migration<n-term>planar cell polarity<n-term>zebrafish<n-term><newabs>26553870<newchar>Fibrosis is characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and stiffening. However, the functional contribution of tissue stiffening to noncancer pathogenesis remains largely unknown. Fibronectin (Fn) is an ECM glycoprotein substantially expressed during tissue repair. Here we show in advanced chronic liver fibrogenesis using a mouse model lacking Fn that, unexpectedly, Fn-null livers lead to more extensive liver cirrhosis, which is accompanied by increased liver matrix stiffness and deteriorated hepatic functions. Furthermore, Fn-null livers exhibit more myofibroblast phenotypes and accumulate highly disorganized/diffuse collagenous ECM networks composed of thinner and significantly increased number of collagen fibrils during advanced chronic liver damage. Mechanistically, mutant livers show elevated local TGF-β activity and lysyl oxidase expressions. A significant amount of active lysyl oxidase is released in Fn-null hepatic stellate cells in response to TGF-β1 through canonical and noncanonical Smad such as PI3 kinase-mediated pathways. TGF-β1-induced collagen fibril stiffness in Fn-null hepatic stellate cells is significantly higher compared with wild-type cells. Inhibition of lysyl oxidase significantly reduces collagen fibril stiffness, and treatment of Fn recovers collagen fibril stiffness to wild-type levels. Thus, our findings indicate an indispensable role for Fn in chronic liver fibrosis/cirrhosis in negatively regulating TGF-β bioavailability, which in turn modulates ECM remodeling and stiffening and consequently preserves adult organ functions. Furthermore, this regulatory mechanism by Fn could be translated for a potential therapeutic target in a broader variety of chronic fibrotic diseases.<newchar>chronic hepatic fibrogenesis<n-term>conditional knockout mouse<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>liver injury<n-term>lysyl oxidase<n-term>tissue stiffness<n-term>transforming growth factor beta (TGF-B)<n-term><newabs>22215601<newchar>The role of extrinsic factors in maintaining self-renewal of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) has been extensively studied since the cells' isolation, but the necessity for cell-secreted factors in self-renewal has remained undefined to date. Although it is generally accepted that addition of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) together with either serum or bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) is sufficient to maintain mouse ESCs (mESCs) in a self-renewing state, this does not preclude the possibility that autocrine factors are also required. Here we make use of a microfluidic perfusion device that is able to globally diminish diffusible autocrine signaling by applying continuous media flow to deplete cell-secreted factors. We demonstrate mESC culture for several days under continuous microfluidic perfusion and show that cell-secreted factors are removed and can be recovered downstream. We find that perturbing cell-secreted signaling causes mESCs to exit their stable self-renewing state in defined conditions that normally support self-renewal and to exhibit properties characteristic of epiblast cells. This state change is not due to the presence of the known autocrine differentiation inducer fibroblast growth factor 4, but, remarkably, it can be prevented by global remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We also find that cell-secreted matrix remodeling proteins are removed under perfusion and that inhibition of extracellular matrix remodeling causes mESCs to differentiate. Taken together, our data indicate that LIF and BMP4 are not sufficient to maintain self-renewal and that cell-secreted factors are necessary to continuously remodel the ECM and thereby prevent differentiation, revealing a previously undescribed level of mESC regulation through the use of microfluidic perfusion technology.<newchar><newabs>24147829<newchar>The microenvironment plays a vital role in both the maintenance of stem cells in their undifferentiated state (niche) and their differentiation after homing into new locations outside this niche. Contrary to conventional in-vitro culture practices, the in-vivo stem cell microenvironment is physiologically crowded. We demonstrate here that re-introducing macromolecular crowding (MMC) at biologically relevant fractional volume occupancy during chemically induced adipogenesis substantially enhances the adipogenic differentiation response of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Both early and late adipogenic markers were significantly up-regulated and cells accumulated 25-40% more lipid content under MMC relative to standard induction cocktails. MMC significantly enhanced deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), notably collagen IV and perlecan, a heparan sulfate proteoglycan. As a novel observation, MMC also increased the presence of matrix metalloproteinase -2 in the deposited ECM, which was concomitant with geometrical ECM remodeling typical of adipogenesis. This suggested a microenvironment that was richer in both matrix components and associated ligands and was conducive to adipocyte maturation. This assumption was confirmed by seeding undifferentiated MSCs on decellularized ECM deposited by adipogenically differentiated MSCs, Adipo-ECM. On Adipo-ECM generated under crowding, MSCs differentiated much faster under a classical differentiation protocol. This was evidenced throughout the induction time course, by a significant up-regulation of both early and late adipogenic markers and a 60% higher lipid content on MMC-generated Adipo-ECM in comparison to standard induction on tissue culture plastic. This suggests that MMC helps build and endow the nascent microenvironment with adipogenic cues. Therefore, MMC initiates a positive feedback loop between cells and their microenvironment as soon as progenitor cells are empowered to build and shape it, and, in turn, are informed by it to respond by attaining a stable differentiated phenotype if so induced. This work sheds new light on the utility of MMC to tune the microenvironment to augment the generation of adipose tissue from differentiating human MSCs.<newchar><newabs>24796731<newchar>There is evidence that space flight condition-induced biological damage is associated with increased oxidative stress and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. To explore possible mechanisms, changes in gene expression profiles implicated in oxidative stress and in ECM remodeling in mouse skin were examined after space flight. The metabolic effects of space flight in skin tissues were also characterized. Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-135) was launched at the Kennedy Space Center on a 13-day mission. Female C57BL/6 mice were flown in the STS-135 using animal enclosure modules (AEMs). Within 3-5 h after landing, the mice were euthanized and skin samples were harvested for gene array analysis and metabolic biochemical assays. Many genes responsible for regulating production and metabolism of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were significantly (p &lt; 0.05) altered in the flight group, with fold changes &gt;1.5 compared to AEM control. For ECM profile, several genes encoding matrix and metalloproteinases involved in ECM remodeling were significantly up-/down-regulated following space flight. To characterize the metabolic effects of space flight, global biochemical profiles were evaluated. Of 332 named biochemicals, 19 differed significantly (p &lt; 0.05) between space flight skin samples and AEM ground controls, with 12 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated including altered amino acid, carbohydrate metabolism, cell signaling, and transmethylation pathways. Collectively, the data demonstrated that space flight condition leads to a shift in biological and metabolic homeostasis as the consequence of increased regulation in cellular antioxidants, ROS production, and tissue remodeling. This indicates that astronauts may be at increased risk for pathophysiologic damage or carcinogenesis in cutaneous tissue.<newchar>STS-135<n-term>metabolomic profiling<n-term>oxidative stress<n-term>skin<n-term>space flight<n-term><newabs>26235342<newchar>Biological scaffold materials derived from the extracellular matrix (ECM) of intact mammalian tissues have been successfully used in a variety of tissue engineering/regenerative medicine applications both in preclinical studies and in clinical applications. Although it is recognized that the materials have constructive remodeling properties, the mechanisms by which functional tissue restoration is achieved are not well understood. There is evidence to support essential roles for both the structural and functional characteristics of the biological scaffold materials. This paper provides an overview of the composition and structure of selected ECM scaffold materials, the effects of manufacturing methods upon the structural properties and resulting mechanical behavior of the scaffold materials, and the in vivo degradation and remodeling of ECM scaffolds with an emphasis on tissue function.<newchar>Degradation<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Remodeling<n-term>Scaffold<n-term>Ultrastructure<n-term><newabs>22064654<newchar>Extracellular superoxide dismutase (EcSOD) is an important superoxide scavenger in the lung in which its loss, sequence variation, or abnormal expression contributes to lung diseases; however, the role of EcSOD in lung cancer has yet to be studied. We hypothesized that EcSOD loss could affect malignant progression in lung, and could be either genetic or epigenetic in nature. To test this, we analyzed EcSOD expression, gene copy number, promoter methylation, and chromatin accessibility in normal lung and carcinoma cells. We found that normal airway epithelial cells expressed abundant EcSOD and had an unmethylated promoter, whereas EcSOD-negative lung cancer cells displayed aberrant promoter hypermethylation and decreased chromatin accessibility. 5-aza-dC induced EcSOD suggesting that cytosine methylation was causal, in part, to silencing. In 48/50 lung tumors, EcSOD mRNA was significantly lower as early as stage I, and the EcSOD promoter was hypermethylated in 8/10 (80%) adenocarcinomas compared with 0/5 normal lung samples. In addition, 20% of the tumors showed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of EcSOD. Reexpression of EcSOD attenuated the malignant phenotype of lung carcinoma cells by significantly decreasing invasion and survival. Finally, EcSOD decreased heparanase and syndecan-1 mRNAs in part by reducing NF-κB. By contrast, MnSOD and CuZnSOD showed no significant changes in lung tumors and had no effect on heparanase expression. Taken together, the loss of EcSOD expression is unique among the superoxide dismutases in lung cancer and is the result of EcSOD promoter methylation and LOH, suggesting that its early loss may contribute to ECM remodeling and malignant progression.<newchar><newabs>21740273<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) have been used successfully in preclinical models and humans for constructive remodeling of functional, site-appropriate tissue after injury. The mechanisms underlying ECM-mediated constructive remodeling are not completely understood, but scaffold degradation and site-directed recruitment of progenitor cells are thought to play critical roles. Previous studies have identified a cryptic peptide derived from the C-terminal telopeptide of collagen IIIα that has chemotactic activity for progenitor cells. The present study characterized the osteogenic activity of the same peptide in vitro and in vivo in an adult murine model of digit amputation. The present study showed that the cryptic peptide increased calcium deposition, alkaline phosphatase activity, and osteogenic gene expression in human perivascular stem cells in vitro. Treatment with the cryptic peptide in a murine model of mid-second phalanx digit amputation led to the formation of a bone nodule at the site of amputation. In addition to potential therapeutic implications for the treatment of bone injuries and facilitation of reconstructive surgical procedures, cryptic peptides with the ability to alter stem cell recruitment and differentiation at a site of injury may serve as powerful new tools for influencing stem cell fate in the local injury microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>26290530<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM), including regulation of proteoglycans in skeletal muscle can be important for physiological adaptation to exercise. To investigate the effects of acute and long-term exercise on the expression of ECM-related genes and proteoglycans in particular, 26 middle-aged, sedentary men underwent a 12 weeks supervised endurance and strength training intervention and two acute, 45 min bicycle tests (70% VO2max), one at baseline and one after 12 weeks of training. Total gene expression in biopsies from m. vastus lateralis was measured with deep mRNA sequencing. After 45 min of bicycling approximately 550 gene transcripts were &gt;50% upregulated. Of these, 28 genes (5%) were directly related to ECM. In response to long-term exercise of 12 weeks 289 genes exhibited enhanced expression (&gt;50%) and 20% of them were ECM related. Further analyses of proteoglycan mRNA expression revealed that more than half of the proteoglycans expressed in muscle were significantly enhanced after 12 weeks intervention. The proteoglycan serglycin (SRGN) has not been studied in skeletal muscle and was one of few proteoglycans that showed increased expression after acute (2.2-fold, P &lt; 0.001) as well as long-term exercise (1.4-fold, P &lt; 0.001). Cultured, primary human skeletal muscle cells expressed and secreted SRGN. When the expression of SRGN was knocked down, the expression and secretion of serpin E1 (SERPINE1) increased. In conclusion, acute and especially long-term exercise promotes enhanced expression of several ECM components and proteoglycans. SRGN is a novel exercise-regulated proteoglycan in skeletal muscle with a potential role in exercise adaptation.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>physical activity<n-term>proteoglycan<n-term>serglycin<n-term>serpin E1<n-term><newabs>24474961<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) within the vascular network provides both a structural and regulatory role. The ECM is a dynamic composite of multiple proteins that form structures connecting cells within the network. Blood vessels are distended by blood pressure and, therefore, require ECM components with elasticity yet with enough tensile strength to resist rupture. The ECM is involved in conducting mechanical signals to cells. Most importantly, ECM regulates cellular function through chemical signaling by controlling activation and bioavailability of the growth factors. Cells respond to ECM by remodeling their microenvironment which becomes dysregulated in vascular diseases such hypertension, restenosis and atherosclerosis. This review examines the cellular and ECM components of vessels, with specific emphasis on the regulation of collagen type I and implications in vascular disease.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>vascular disease<n-term><newabs>24577968<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is best known for its function as a structural scaffold for the tissue and more recently as a microenvironment to sequester growth factors and cytokines allowing for rapid and localized changes in their activity in the absence of new protein synthesis. In this review, we explore this and additional new aspects of ECM function in mediating cell-to-cell communications. Fibrillar and nonfibrillar components of ECM can limit and facilitate the transport of molecules through the extracellular space while also regulating interstitial hydrostatic pressure. In turn, transmembrane communications via molecules, such as ECM metalloproteinase inducer, thrombospondins, and integrins, can further mediate cell response to extracellular cues and affect ECM composition and tissue remodeling. Other means of cell-to-cell communication include extracellular microRNA transport and its contribution to gene expression in target cells and the nanotube formation between distant cells, which has recently emerged as a novel conduit for intercellular organelle sharing thereby influencing cell survival and function. The information summarized and discussed here are not limited to the cardiovascular ECM but encompass ECM in general with specific references to the cardiovascular system.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer<n-term>microRNAs<n-term><newabs>23203966<newchar>Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) activation promotes a synthetic phenotype that underlies many vessel growth disorders. In this regard it has been suggested that the metabolic sensor adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has significant antigrowth and antimetastatic properties and may serve as a viable therapeutic target. In the current study we hypothesized that AMPK reduces neointima formation following balloon injury and that this occurs through reduction in VSMC proliferation and migration. Data reveal that local or systemic dosing with the AMPK agonist 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-d-ribofuranoside (AICAR) significantly increased AMPK activity in vivo and inhibited neointima formation in rat carotid arteries 2 wk after injury. In primary VSMCs, AICAR inhibited migration and induced cytostatic growth arrest through increased protein phosphatase 2A-mediated inhibition of mitosis-promoting cyclin B. AICAR also significantly enhanced AMPK-specific T278 phosphorylation of the actin anticapping vasodilator-activated serum phosphoprotein, increased G- to F-actin ratios and stress fiber formation, and abrogated PDGF-stimulated S397 autophosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase, promigratory cytoplasmic accumulation of paxillin, and extracellular matrix proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinase-9. Together, these results provide compelling evidence that AMPK serves to inhibit vascular smooth muscle migration and proliferation through regulation of cytoskeletal/focal adhesion/ECM stability, increasing our knowledge of this important metabolic regulator and providing support for its continued investigation in the treatment of vascular growth disorders.<newchar><newabs>25827718<newchar>MicroRNAs (miRs) play an important role in the development and remodeling of tissues through the regulation of large cohorts of extracellular matrix (ECM) genes. The purpose of the present study was to determine the response of miR-29 family expression to loading forces and their effects on ECM gene expression in periodontal ligament cells, the key effector cell population during orthodontic tooth movement. In a comparison between miRs from human periodontal ligament cells (PDLCs) and alveolar bone cells (ABCs) from healthy human subjects, the ABC cohort of miRs was substantially greater than the corresponding PDLC cohort. Cyclic mechanical stretch forces at 12% deformation at 0.1Hz for 24h decreased expression of miR-29 family member miRs about 0.5 fold while 2g/cm(2) compression force for 24h increased miR-29 family member expression in PDLCs 1.8-4 folds. Cyclic stretch up-regulated major ECM genes in PDLCs, such as COL1A1, COL3A1 and COL5A1, while the compression force resulted in a down-regulation of these ECM genes. Direct interactions of miR-29 and Col1a1, Col3a1 and Col5a1 were confirmed using a dual luciferase reporter gene assay. In addition, transient transfection of a miR-29b mimic in mouse PDLCs down-regulated Col1a1, Col3a1 and Col5a1 while the transfection of miR-29b inhibitor up-regulated these genes compared to control transfection indicating that these target ECM genes directly responded to the altered level of miR-29b. These results provided a possible explanation for the effects of the miR-29 family on loaded PDLCS and their roles in extracellular matrix gene expression.<newchar>Compression<n-term>Cyclic stretch<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>MicroRNA<n-term>Periodontal ligament<n-term><newabs>21135056<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of extracellular proteases performs crucial roles in development and repair of the skeleton owing to their ability to remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) and release bioactive molecules. Most MMP-null skeletal phenotypes that have been previously described are mild, thus permitting the assessment of their functions during bone repair in the adult. In humans and mice, MMP2 deficiency causes a musculoskeletal phenotype. In this study, we assessed the role of MMP2 during mouse fracture repair and compared it with the roles of MMP9 and MMP13. Mmp2 was expressed at low levels in the normal skeleton and was broadly expressed in the fracture callus. Treatment of wild-type mice with a general MMP inhibitor, GM6001, caused delayed cartilage remodeling and bone formation during fracture repair, which resembles the defect observed in Mmp9(-/-) mice. Unlike Mmp9- and Mmp13-null mutations, which affect both cartilage and bone in the callus, the Mmp2-null mutation delayed bone remodeling but not cartilage remodeling. This remodeling defect occurred without changes in either osteoclast recruitment or vascular invasion of the fracture callus compared with wild type. However, we did not detect changes in expression of Mmp9, Mmp13 or Mt1-Mmp (Mmp14) in the calluses of Mmp2-null mice compared with wild type by in situ hybridization, but we observed decreased expression of Timp2 in the calluses of Mmp2-, Mmp9- and Mmp13-null mice. In keeping with the skeletal phenotype of Mmp2-null mice, MMP2 plays a role in the remodeling of new bone within the fracture callus and impacts later stages of bone repair compared with MMP9 and MMP13. Taken together, our results indicate that MMPs play unique and distinct roles in regulating skeletal tissue deposition and remodeling during fracture repair.<newchar><newabs>21880728<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) actively participates in normal cell regulation and in the process of tumor progression. The Rho GTPase Cdc42 has been shown to regulate cell-ECM interaction in conventional two-dimensional culture conditions by using dominant mutants of Cdc42 in immortalized cell lines that may introduce nonspecific effects. Here, we employ three-dimensional culture systems for conditional gene targeted primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts that better simulate the reciprocal and adaptive interactions between cells and surrounding matrix to define the role of Cdc42 signaling pathways in ECM organization. Cdc42 deficiency leads to a defect in global cell-matrix interactions reflected by a decrease in collagen gel contraction. The defect is associated with an altered cell-matrix interaction that is evident by morphologic changes and reduced focal adhesion complex formation. The matrix defect is also associated with a reduction in synthesis and activation of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and altered fibronectin deposition patterning. A Cdc42 mutant rescue experiment found that downstream of Cdc42, p21-activated kinase (PAK), but not Par6 or WASP, may be involved in regulating collagen gel contraction and fibronectin organization. Thus, in addition to the previously implicated roles in intracellular regulation of actin organization, proliferation, and vesicle trafficking, Cdc42 is essential in ECM remodeling in three dimensions.<newchar><newabs>25111563<newchar>Adipose derived stromal cells (ADSC) are relevant therapeutic agents to treat myocardial infarction (MI) in clinical trials. Soluble factors secreted by ADSC, such as growth factors and cytokines, suppress inflammation and apoptosis while promoting angiogenesis and the proliferation of cardiomyocytes (CM). Moreover, ADSC synthesize extracellular matrix (ECM) components into the intercellular space which might contribute to their therapeutic capacity. Thus, ADSC might directly modulate the post-MI microenvironment through a combination of paracrine and juxtacrine signaling. In this study, the juxtacrine role of ADSC and ADSC-derived ECM on the organization and maturation of CM was investiagated. Human ADSC synthesized and deposited a heterogenous and complex mixture of ECM components such as collagen I, III, IV, fibronectin, elastin as well as the matricellular protein periostin. Cocultures of rodent CM with human ADSC or with human ADSC-derived ECM components enhanced the cardiomyocyte alignment, their intercellular connections and the maturation of their sarcomeres, while the proliferation rate of the CM was increased and their level of hypertrophy reduced. The use of human ADSC-derived ECM could serve both to augment in vitro tissue-engineered myocardial constructs and to improve myocardial remodeling after infarction.<newchar>adipose derived stromal cells<n-term>cardiomyocytes<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>myocardial infarction<n-term><newabs>23637919<newchar>Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have emerged as potential cell sources for tissue engineering and regeneration owing to its virtually unlimited replicative capacity and the potential to differentiate into a variety of cell types. Current differentiation strategies primarily involve various growth factor/inducer/repressor concoctions with less emphasis on the substrate. Developing biomaterials to promote stem cell proliferation and differentiation could aid in the realization of this goal. Extracellular matrix (ECM) components are important physiological regulators, and can provide cues to direct ESC expansion and differentiation. ECM undergoes constant remodeling with surrounding cells to accommodate specific developmental event. In this study, using ESC derived aggregates called embryoid bodies (EB) as a model, we characterized the biological nature of ECM in EB after exposure to different treatments: spontaneously differentiated and retinoic acid treated (denoted as SPT and RA, respectively). Next, we extracted this treatment-specific ECM by detergent decellularization methods (Triton X-100, DOC and SDS are compared). The resulting EB ECM scaffolds were seeded with undifferentiated ESCs using a novel cell seeding strategy, and the behavior of ESCs was studied. Our results showed that the optimized protocol efficiently removes cells while retaining crucial ECM and biochemical components. Decellularized ECM from SPT EB gave rise to a more favorable microenvironment for promoting ESC attachment, proliferation, and early differentiation, compared to native EB and decellularized ECM from RA EB. These findings suggest that various treatment conditions allow the formulation of unique ESC-ECM derived scaffolds to enhance ESC bioactivities, including proliferation and differentiation for tissue regeneration applications.<newchar><newabs>23287455<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex entity containing a large portfolio of structural proteins, signaling molecules, and proteases. Changes in the overall integrity and activational state of these ECM constituents can contribute to tissue structure and function, which is certainly true of the myocardium. Changes in the expression patterns and activational states of a family of ECM proteolytic enzymes, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), have been identified in all forms of left ventricle remodeling and can be a contributory factor in the progression to heart failure. However, new clinical and basic research has identified some surprising and unpredicted changes in MMP profiles in left ventricle remodeling processes, such as with pressure or volume overload, as well as with myocardial infarction. From these studies, it has become recognized that proteolytic processing of signaling molecules by certain MMP types, particularly the transmembrane MMPs, actually may facilitate ECM accumulation and modulate fibroblast transdifferentiation; both are critical events in adverse left ventricle remodeling. Based on the ever-increasing substrates and diversity of biological actions of MMPs, it is likely that continued research about the relationship of left ventricle remodeling in this family of proteases will yield new insights into the ECM remodeling process and new therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>24004192<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of mammalian extracellular matrix (ECM) promote constructive remodeling of tissues via mechanisms that include the recruitment of endogenous stem/progenitor cells, modulation of the host innate immune response, and influence of cell fate differentiation. Such scaffold materials are typically prepared by decellularization of source tissues and are prepared as sheets, powder, or hydrogels. It is plausible that ECM derived from an anatomically distinct tissue would have unique or specific effects on cells that naturally reside in this same tissue. The present study investigated the in vitro effect of a soluble form of ECM derived from central nervous system (CNS) tissue, specifically the spinal cord or brain, versus ECM derived from a non-CNS tissue; specifically, the urinary bladder on the behavior of neural stem cells (NSCs) and perivascular stem cells. All forms of ECM induce positive, mitogenic, and chemotactic effects at concentrations of approximately 100 μg/mL without affecting stem cell viability. CNS-derived ECMs also showed the ability to differentiate NSCs into neurons as indicted by βIII-tubulin expression in two-dimensional culture and neurite extension on the millimeter scale after 24 days of three-dimensional cultures in an ECM hydrogel. These results suggest that solubilized forms of ECM scaffold materials may facilitate the postinjury healing response in CNS tissues.<newchar><newabs>20165883<newchar>We have evaluated RECK (reversion-inducing-cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs), MMP-2 (matrix metalloproteinase-2), MMP-3, and MMP-9 involvement during palate development in mice by using various techniques. Immunohistochemical features revealed the distribution of RECK, MMP-2, and MMP-3 in the mesenchymal tissue and in the midline epithelial seam at embryonic day 13 (E13), MMPs-2, -3, and -9 being particularly expressed at E14 and E14.5. In contrast, RECK was weakly immunostained at these times. Involvement of MMPs was validated by measuring not only their protein expression, but also their activity (zymograms). In situ hybridization signal (ISH) for RECK transcript was distributed in mesenchymal and epithelial regions within palatal shelves at all periods evaluated. Importantly, the results from ISH analysis were in accord with those obtained by real-time polymerase chain reaction. The expression of RECK was found to be temporally regulated, which suggested possible roles in palatal ontogeny. Taken together, our results clearly show that remodeling of the extracellular matrix is finely modulated during secondary palate development and occurs in a sequential manner.<newchar><newabs>27176036<newchar>The biological configuration of extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in how mechanical interactions of the airway with its parenchymal attachments affect the dynamics of airway responses in different pulmonary disorders including asthma, emphysema and chronic bronchitis. It is now recognized that mechanical interactions between airway tissue and ECM play a key regulatory role on airway physiology and kinetics that can lead to the reorganization and remodeling of airway connective tissue. A connective tissue is composed of airway smooth muscle cells (ASM) and the ECM, which includes variety of glycoproteins and therefore the extent of interactions between ECM and ASM affects airway dynamics during exacerbations of major pulmonary disorders. Measurement of the velocity and magnitude of airway closure or opening provide important insights into the functions of the airway contractile apparatus and the interactions with its surrounding connective tissues. This review highlights suitability of lung microsection technique in studying measurements of airway dynamics (narrowing/opening) and associated structural distortions in airway compartments.<newchar>ASM hyperresponsiveness<n-term>Airway kinetics<n-term>Lung microsections<n-term>Velocity of airway narrowing<n-term>Video micrometry<n-term><newabs>10842355<newchar>The determination of animal form depends on the coordination of events that lead to the morphological patterning of cells. This epigenetic view of development suggests that embryonic structures arise as a consequence of environmental influences acting on the properties of cells, rather than an unfolding of a completely genetically specified and preexisting invisible pattern. Specialized cells of developing multicellular organisms are surrounded by a complex extracellular matrix (ECM), comprised largely of different collagens, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins. This ECM is a substrate for tissue morphogenesis, lends support and flexibility to mature tissues, and acts as an epigenetic informational entity in the sense that it transduces and integrates intracellular signals via distinct cell surface receptors. Consequently, ECM-receptor interactions have a profound influence on major cellular programs including growth, differentiation, migration, and survival. In contrast to many other ECM proteins, the tenascin (TN) family of glycoproteins (TN-C, TN-R, TN-W, TN-X, and TN-Y) display highly restricted and dynamic patterns of expression in the embryo, particularly during neural development, skeletogenesis, and vasculogenesis. These molecules are reexpressed in the adult during normal processes such as wound healing, nerve regeneration, and tissue involution, and in pathological states including vascular disease, tumorigenesis, and metastasis. In concert with a multitude of associated ECM proteins and cell surface receptors that include members of the integrin family, TN proteins impart contrary cellular functions, depending on their mode of presentation (i.e., soluble or substrate-bound) and the cell types and differentiation states of the target tissues. Expression of tenascins is regulated by a variety of growth factors, cytokines, vasoactive peptides, ECM proteins, and biomechanical factors. The signals generated by these factors converge on particular combinations of cis-regulatory elements within the recently identified TN gene promoters via specific transcriptional activators or repressors. Additional complexity in regulating TN gene expression is achieved through alternative splicing, resulting in variants of TN polypeptides that exhibit different combinations of functional protein domains. In this review, we discuss some of the recent advances in TN biology that provide insights into the complex way in which the ECM is regulated and how it functions to regulate tissue morphogenesis and gene expression.<newchar><newabs>24364042<newchar>The trabecular meshwork (TM) is a filter-like tissue located in the anterior segment of the eye. It is composed of a series of fenestrated beams through which aqueous humor flows to exit the anterior chamber via Schlemm's canal. The primary function of the TM is to regulate the flow of aqueous humor in order to establish intraocular pressure (IOP). Dysregulated aqueous humor outflow causes elevated IOP, which is a primary risk factor for glaucoma. The region of the TM implicated in establishing IOP lies adjacent to Schlemm's canal and is called the juxtacanalicular tissue (JCT) or cribriform region. Recent advanced light microscopy studies suggest that the JCT can be subdivided into inner and outer zones based on the localization of certain extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules. By comparing the ECM of the JCT to other connectives tissues and disease processes, this review outlines the evidence for two new concepts in TM biology: (1) continuous maintenance ECM remodeling, which may be critical in order to preserve open aqueous humor flow channels by releasing trapped debris and associated ECM fragments from the outflow pathways; (2) the JCT ECM as a barrier to functionally isolate the aqueous outflow channels. The ECM surrounding the outflow channels in the JCT may function to sequester small active regulatory molecules and prevent them from aberrantly modulating outflow resistance. These adaptations point to a distinctive tissue that has evolved transient ECM remodeling processes in order to regulate aqueous humor outflow and maintain rigorous control of IOP.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Glaucoma<n-term>Intraocular pressure<n-term>Outflow resistance<n-term>Trabecular meshwork<n-term><newabs>23974174<newchar>The current prevalence and severity of heart defects requiring functional replacement of cardiac tissue pose a serious clinical challenge. Biologic scaffolds are an attractive tissue engineering approach to cardiac repair because they avoid sensitization associated with homograft materials and theoretically possess the potential for growth in similar patterns as surrounding native tissue. Both urinary bladder matrix (UBM) and cardiac ECM (C-ECM) have been previously investigated as scaffolds for cardiac repair with modest success, but have not been compared directly. In other tissue locations, bone marrow derived cells have been shown to play a role in the remodeling process, but this has not been investigated for UBM in the cardiac location, and has never been studied for C-ECM. The objectives of the present study were to compare the effectiveness of an organ-specific C-ECM patch with a commonly used ECM scaffold for myocardial tissue repair of the right ventricle outflow tract (RVOT), and to examine the role of bone marrow derived cells in the remodeling response. A chimeric rat model in which all bone marrow cells express green fluorescent protein (GFP) was generated and used to show the ability of ECM scaffolds derived from the heart and bladder to support cardiac function and cellular growth in the RVOT. The results from this study suggest that urinary bladder matrix may provide a more appropriate substrate for myocardial repair than cardiac derived matrices, as shown by differences in the remodeling responses following implantation, as well as the presence of site appropriate cells and the formation of immature, myocardial tissue.<newchar>cardiac repair<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>regenerative medicine<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term>urinary bladder matrix<n-term><newabs>24311785<newchar>Integrin-based adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays critical roles in controlling differentiation, survival, and motility of epithelial cells. Cells attach to the ECM via dynamic structures called focal adhesions (FA). FA undergo constant remodeling mediated by vesicle trafficking and fusion. A soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein α (αSNAP) is an essential mediator of membrane fusion; however, its roles in regulating ECM adhesion and cell motility remain unexplored. In this study, we found that siRNA-mediated knockdown of αSNAP induced detachment of intestinal epithelial cells, whereas overexpression of αSNAP increased ECM adhesion and inhibited cell invasion. Loss of αSNAP impaired Golgi-dependent glycosylation and trafficking of β1 integrin and decreased phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxillin resulting in FA disassembly. These effects of αSNAP depletion on ECM adhesion were independent of apoptosis and NSF. In agreement with our previous reports that Golgi fragmentation mediates cellular effects of αSNAP knockdown, we found that either pharmacologic or genetic disruption of the Golgi recapitulated all the effects of αSNAP depletion on ECM adhesion. Furthermore, our data implicates β1 integrin, FAK, and paxillin in mediating the observed pro-adhesive effects of αSNAP. These results reveal novel roles for αSNAP in regulating ECM adhesion and motility of epithelial cells.<newchar>Cell Adhesion<n-term>Cell Migration<n-term>Cell Motility<n-term>Snare Proteins<n-term>Trafficking<n-term><newabs>25599939<newchar>The liver is a large highly vascularized organ with a central function in metabolic homeostasis, detoxification, and immunity. Due to its roles, the liver is frequently exposed to various insults which can cause cell death and hepatic dysfunction. Alternatively, the liver has a remarkable ability to self-repair and regenerate after injury. Liver injury and regeneration have both been linked to complex extracellular matrix (ECM) related pathways. While normal degradation of ECM components is an important feature of tissue repair and remodeling, irregular ECM turnover contributes to a variety of liver diseases. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the main enzymes implicated in ECM degradation. MMPs not only remodel the ECM, but also regulate immune responses. In this review, we highlight some of the MMP-attributed roles in acute and chronic liver injury and emphasize the need for further experimentation to better understand their functions during hepatic physiological conditions and disease progression.<newchar>Acute liver injury<n-term>Chronic liver injury<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Liver<n-term>Liver injury<n-term>Liver ischemia and reperfusion injury<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term><newabs>27213995<newchar>The in vitro fabrication of an endogenous cardiac muscle would have a high impact for both in vitro studies concerning cardiac tissue physiology and pathology, as well as in vivo application to potentially repair infarcted myocardium. To reach this aim, we engineered a new class of cardiac tissue precursor (CTP), specifically conceived in order to promote the synthesis and the assembly of a cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM). The CTPs were obtained by culturing a mixed cardiac cell population, composed of myocyte and non-myocyte cells, into porous gelatin microspheres in a dynamic bioreactor. By engineering the culture conditions, the CTP developed both beating properties and an endogenous immature cardiac ECM. By following a bottom-up approach, a macrotissue was fabricated by molding and packing the engineered tissue precursor in a maturation chamber. During the macrotissue formation, the tissue precursors acted as cardiac tissue depots by promoting the formation of an endogenous and interconnected cardiac network embedding the cells and the microbeads. The myocytes cell fraction pulled on ECM network and induced its compaction against the internal posts represented by the initial porous microbeads. This reciprocal interplay induced ECM consolidation without the use of external biophysical stimuli by leading to the formation of a beating and endogenous macrotissue. We have thus engineered a new class of cardiac micromodules and show its potential for the fabrication of endogenous cardiac tissue models useful for in vitro studies that involve the cardiac tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26199591<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) performs essential functions in the differentiation, maintenance and remodeling of tissues during development and regeneration, and it undergoes dynamic changes during remodeling concomitant to alterations in the cell-ECM interactions. Here we discuss recent data addressing the critical role of the widely expressed ECM protein, matrilin-2 (Matn2) in the timely onset of differentiation and regeneration processes in myogenic, neural and other tissues and in tumorigenesis. As a multiadhesion adaptor protein, it interacts with other ECM proteins and integrins. Matn2 promotes neurite outgrowth, Schwann cell migration, neuromuscular junction formation, skeletal muscle and liver regeneration and skin wound healing. Matn2 deposition by myoblasts is crucial for the timely induction of the global switch toward terminal myogenic differentiation during muscle regeneration by affecting transforming growth factor beta/bone morphogenetic protein 7/Smad and other signal transduction pathways. Depending on the type of tissue and the pathomechanism, Matn2 can also promote or suppress tumor growth.<newchar>Schwann cells<n-term>TGF-β/BMP-7/Smad signaling<n-term>Trf3<n-term>multiple sclerosis<n-term>myogenic differentiation<n-term>neurite outgrowth<n-term>neuromuscular junction (NMJ)<n-term>tumor suppression<n-term><newabs>26658613<newchar>Mechanisms regulating how groups of cells are signaled to move collectively from their original site and invade surrounding matrix are poorly understood. Here we develop a clinically relevant ex vivo injury invasion model to determine whether cells involved in directing wound healing have invasive function and whether they can act as leader cells to direct movement of a wounded epithelium through a three-dimensional (3D) extracellular matrix (ECM) environment. Similar to cancer invasion, we found that the injured cells invade into the ECM as cords, involving heterotypical cell-cell interactions. Mesenchymal cells with properties of activated repair cells that typically locate to a wound edge are present in leader positions at the front of ZO-1-rich invading cords of cells, where they extend vimentin intermediate filament-enriched protrusions into the 3D ECM. Injury-induced invasion depends on both vimentin cytoskeletal function and MMP-2/9 matrix remodeling, because inhibiting either of these suppressed invasion. Potential push and pull forces at the tips of the invading cords were revealed by time-lapse imaging, which showed cells actively extending and retracting protrusions into the ECM. This 3D injury invasion model can be used to investigate mechanisms of leader cell-directed invasion and understand how mechanisms of wound healing are hijacked to cause disease.<newchar><newabs>24798055<newchar>A major onset of heart failure is myocardial infarction, which causes the myocardium to lose cardiomyocytes and transform into a scar tissue. Since mammalian infarcted cardiac tissue has a limited ability to regenerate, alternative strategies including implantation of tissue-engineered scaffolds at the site of damaged myocardium have been explored. The goal is to enable in situ cardiac reconstruction at the injured myocardium site, replace the lost cardiomyocytes, deliver the required biomolecules, and remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM synthesis and deposition by cardiomyocytes within such scaffolds remains categorically unexplored. Here, we investigated the survival, ECM synthesis and deposition, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) release by cardiomyocytes within three-dimensional (3D) substrates. Rat cardiomyocytes were cultured for three weeks within two structurally different substrates: 3D collagen hydrogels or polycaprolactone (PCL) nanofibrous scaffolds. The concentration and composition of the hydrogels was varied, while PCL nanofibers were surface-modified with various ECM proteins. Results showed that myocyte attachment and survival was higher within collagen hydrogels, while myocyte alignment and beating was noted only within PCL scaffolds. Total protein synthesis by myocytes within PCL scaffolds was significantly higher compared to that within collagen hydrogels, although more protein was deposited as matrix within hydrogels. Significant ECM synthesis and matrix deposition, TIMP-1, and MMP release were noted within modified collagen hydrogels and PCL nanofiber scaffolds. These results were qualitatively confirmed by imaging techniques. Results attest to the prominent role of scaffold composition and architecture in influencing cardiomyocyte phenotype, matrix synthesis and cytokines release, with significant applications in cardiac tissue remodeling strategies.<newchar>cardiomyocytes<n-term>elastin<n-term>hydrogels<n-term>matrix synthesis<n-term>nanofibers<n-term><newabs>20618403<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) in the brain is composed of molecules synthesized and secreted by neurons and glial cells, which form stable aggregates of diverse composition in the extracellular space. In the mature brain, ECM undergoes a slow turnover and restrains structural plasticity while supporting multiple physiologic processes, including perisomatic gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic inhibition, synaptic plasticity, and homeostatic regulations. Seizures lead to striking remodeling of ECM, which may be essentially engaged in different aspects of epileptogenesis. This view is supported by human genetic studies linking ECM molecules and epilepsy, by data showing altered epileptogenesis in mice deficient in ECM molecules, and by evidence that ECM may shape seizure-induced sprouting of mossy fibers, granule cell dispersion, and astrogliosis. Therefore, restraining seizure-induced remodeling of ECM or suppressing the signaling triggered by the remodeled ECM might provide effective therapeutic strategies to antagonize the progression of epileptogenesis.<newchar><newabs>25819454<newchar>The generation of cellular forces and the application of these physical forces to the ECM play a central role in mediating matrix patterning and remodeling during fundamental processes such as developmental morphogenesis and wound healing. In addition to growth factors and other biochemical factors that can modulate the keratocyte mechanical phenotype, another key player in the regulation of cell-induced ECM patterning is the mechanical state of the ECM itself. In this review we provide an overview of the biochemical and biophysical factors regulating the mechanical interactions between corneal keratocytes and the stromal ECM at the cellular level. We first provide an overview of how Rho GTPases regulate the sub-cellular pattern of force generation by corneal keratocytes, and the impact these forces have on the surrounding ECM. We next review how feedback from local matrix structural and mechanical properties can modulate keratocyte phenotype and mechanical activity. Throughout this review, we provide examples of how these biophysical interactions may contribute to clinical outcomes, with a focus on corneal wound healing.<newchar>Cell mechanics<n-term>Corneal keratocytes<n-term>Corneal stroma<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Mechanobiology<n-term><newabs>25033159<newchar>Hyperglycemia is a defining characteristic of diabetes, and uncontrolled blood glucose in diabetes is associated with accelerated cardiovascular disease. Chronic hyperglycemia glycates extracellular matrix (ECM) collagen, which can lead to endothelial cell dysfunction. In healthy conditions, endothelial cells respond to mechanical stimuli such as cyclic stretch (CS) by aligning their actin cytoskeleton. Other cell types, specifically fibroblasts, align their ECM in response to CS. We previously demonstrated that glycated collagen inhibits endothelial cell actin alignment in response to CS. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of glycated collagen on ECM remodeling and protein alignment in response to stretch. Porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAEC) seeded on native or glycated collagen coated elastic substrates were exposed to 10% CS. Cells on native collagen aligned subcellular fibronectin fibers in response to stretch, whereas cells on glycated collagen did not. The loss of fibronectin alignment was due to inhibited actin alignment in response to CS, since fibronectin alignment did not occur in cells on native collagen when actin alignment was inhibited with cytochalasin. Further, while ECM protein content did not change in cells on native or glycated collagen in response to CS, degradation activity decreased in cells on glycated collagen. Matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and membrane-associated type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) protein levels decreased, and therefore MMP-2 activity also decreased. These MMP changes may relate to c-Jun N-terminal kinase (Jnk) phosphorylation inhibition with CS, which has previously been linked to focal adhesion kinase (FAK). These data demonstrate the importance of endothelial cell actin tension in remodeling and aligning matrix proteins in response to mechanical stimuli, which is critical to vascular remodeling in health and disease.<newchar><newabs>26352161<newchar>Glaucoma is characterized by abnormal remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the trabecular meshwork and in the connective tissue beams of the lamina cribrosa (LC) at the optic nerve head (ONH), which is associated with axonal damage. Mechanical strain can stimulate ECM remodeling and increased expression of matricellular proteins. Thrombospondins 1 and 2 are induced by cyclic mechanical strain in the eye in both the trabecular meshwork and in the LC region of the ONH. TGF-betas 1 and 2 are increased in glaucoma and play a role in the pathologic remodeling of the ECM in the eye in glaucoma. In this study, we address the role of thrombospondin1 as a regulator of latent TGF-beta activation and discuss the potential therapeutic use of antagonists of the thrombospondin1-TGF-beta pathway for treatment of glaucoma.<newchar><newabs>21147120<newchar>Fibroblasts play a pivotal role in cardiac remodeling and the development of heart failure through the deposition of extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins and also by affecting cardiomyocyte growth and function. The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is a key regulator of the cardiovascular system in health and disease and many of its effects involve cardiac fibroblasts. Levels of angiotensin II (Ang II), the main effector molecule of the RAS, are elevated in the failing heart and there is a substantial body of evidence indicating that this peptide contributes to changes in cardiac structure and function which ultimately lead to progressive worsening in heart failure. A pathway involving angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has the capacity to break down Ang II while generating angiotensin-(1-7) (Ang-(1-7)), a heptapeptide, which in contrast to Ang II, has cardioprotective and anti-remodeling effects. Many Ang-(1-7) actions involve cardiac fibroblasts and there is information indicating that it reduces collagen production and also may protect against cardiac hypertrophy. This report describes the effects of ACE2 and Ang-(1-7) that appear to be relevant in cardiac remodeling and heart failure and explores potential therapeutic strategies designed to increase ACE2 activity and Ang-(1-7) levels to treat these conditions. This article is part of a special issue entitled ''Key Signaling Molecules in Hypertrophy and Heart Failure.''<newchar><newabs>25074687<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a large and complex family of zinc-dependent endoproteinases widely recognized for their roles in remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) during embryonic development, wound healing, and tissue homeostasis. Their misregulation is central to many pathologies, and they have therefore been the focus of biomedical research for decades. These proteases have also recently emerged as mediators of neural development and synaptic plasticity in vertebrates, however, understanding of the mechanistic basis of these roles and the molecular identities of the MMPs involved remains far from complete. We have identified a zebrafish orthologue of mmp25 (a.k.a. leukolysin; MT6-MMP), a membrane-type, furin-activated MMP associated with leukocytes and invasive carcinomas, but which we find is expressed by a subset of the sensory neurons during normal embryonic development. We detect high levels of Mmp25β expression in the trigeminal, craniofacial, and posterior lateral line ganglia in the hindbrain, and in Rohon-Beard cells in the dorsal neural tube during the first 48 h of embryonic development. Knockdown of Mmp25β expression with morpholino oligonucleotides results in larvae that are uncoordinated and insensitive to touch, and which exhibit defects in the development of sensory neural structures. Using in vivo zymography, we observe that Mmp25β morphant embryos show reduced Type IV collagen degradation in regions of the head traversed by elongating axons emanating from the trigeminal ganglion, suggesting that Mmp25β may play a pivotal role in mediating ECM remodeling in the vicinity of these elongating axons.<newchar>ECM remodeling<n-term>Leukolysin<n-term>MT6-MMP<n-term>Mmp25<n-term>axon elongation<n-term>axon pathfinding<n-term>in vivo zymography<n-term><newabs>26256250<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) derived scaffolds continue to be investigated for the treatment of volumetric muscle loss (VML) injuries. Clinically, ECM scaffolds have been used for lower extremity VML repair; in particular, MatriStem™, a porcine urinary bladder matrix (UBM), has shown improved functional outcomes and vascularization, but limited myogenesis. However, efficacy of the scaffold for the repair of traumatic muscle injuries has not been examined systematically. In this study, we demonstrate that the porcine UBM scaffold when used to repair a rodent gastrocnemius musculotendinous junction (MTJ) and tibialis anterior (TA) VML injury does not support muscle tissue regeneration. In the MTJ model, the scaffold was completely resorbed without tissue remodeling, suggesting that the scaffold may not be suitable for the clinical repair of muscle-tendon injuries. In the TA VML injury, the scaffold remodeled into a fibrotic tissue and showed functional improvement, but not due to muscle fiber regeneration. The inclusion of physical rehabilitation also did not improve functional response or tissue remodeling. We conclude that the porcine UBM scaffold when used to treat VML injuries may hasten the functional recovery through the mechanism of scaffold mediated functional fibrosis. Thus for appreciable muscle regeneration, repair strategies that incorporate myogenic cells, vasculogenic accelerant and a myoconductive scaffold need to be developed.<newchar>Animal model<n-term>ECM (extracellular matrix)<n-term>Muscle<n-term>Scaffold<n-term>Trauma<n-term>Volumetric muscle loss<n-term><newabs>21780244<newchar>Although the function of transforming growth factor beta2 (TGFβ2) in epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is well studied, its role in valve remodeling remains to be fully explored. Here, we used histological, morphometric, immunohistochemical and molecular approaches and showed that significant dysregulation of major extracellular matrix (ECM) components contributed to valve remodeling defects in Tgfb2(-/-) embryos. The data indicated that cushion mesenchymal cell differentiation was impaired in Tgfb2(-/-) embryos. Hyaluronan and cartilage link protein-1 (CRTL1) were increased in hyperplastic valves of Tgfb2(-/-) embryos, indicating increased expansion and diversification of cushion mesenchyme into the cartilage cell lineage during heart development. Finally, Western blot and immunohistochemistry analyses indicate that the activation of SMAD2/3 was decreased in Tgfb2(-/-) embryos during valve remodeling. Collectively, the data indicate that TGFβ2 promotes valve remodeling and differentiation by inducing matrix organization and suppressing cushion mesenchyme differentiation into cartilage cell lineage during heart development.<newchar><newabs>26092976<newchar>Cardiac and skeletal muscle dysfunction is a recognized effect of cancer-induced cachexia, with alterations in heart function leading to heart failure and negatively impacting patient morbidity. Cachexia is a complex and multifaceted disease state with several potential contributors to cardiac and skeletal muscle dysfunction. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes capable of degrading components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Changes to the ECM cause disruption both in the connections between cells at the basement membrane and in cell-to-cell interactions. In the present study, we used a murine model of C26 adenocarcinoma-induced cancer cachexia to determine changes in MMP gene and protein expression in cardiac and skeletal muscle. We analyzed MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-14 as they have been shown to contribute to both cardiac and skeletal muscle ECM changes and, thereby, to pathology in models of heart failure and muscular dystrophy. In our model, cardiac and skeletal muscles showed a significant increase in RNA and protein levels of several MMPs and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases. Cardiac muscle showed significant protein increases in MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-14, whereas skeletal muscles showed increases in MMP-2, MMP-3, and MMP-14. Furthermore, collagen deposition was increased after C26 adenocarcinoma-induced cancer cachexia as indicated by an increased left ventricular picrosirius red-positive-stained area. Increases in serum hydroxyproline suggest increased collagen turnover, implicating skeletal muscle remodeling. Our findings demonstrate that cancer cachexia-associated matrix remodeling results in cardiac fibrosis and possible skeletal muscle remodeling. With these findings, MMPs represent a possible therapeutic target for the treatment of cancer-induced cachexia.<newchar>cancer cachexia<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase<n-term><newabs>23582036<newchar>Cell transformation and tumor progression involve a common set of acquired capabilities, including increased proliferation, failure of cell death, self-sufficiency in growth, angiogenesis, and tumor cell invasion and metastasis. The stromal environment consists of many cell types and various extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that support normal tissue maintenance and which have been implicated in tumor progression. Both the chemical and mechanical properties of the ECM have been shown to influence normal and malignant cell behavior. For instance, mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into specific lineages that are dependent on matrix stiffness, while tumor cells undergo changes in cell behavior and gene expression in response to matrix stiffness. ECM remodeling is implicated in tumor progression and can result in increased deposition of stromal ECM, enhanced contraction of ECM fibrils, and altered collagen alignment and ECM stiffness. Tumor cells respond to changes in ECM remodeling through altered intracellular signaling and cell cycle control that lead to enhanced proliferation, loss of normal tissue architecture, and local tumor cell migration and invasion. This review focuses on the bi-directional interplay between the mechanical properties of the ECM and integrin-mediated signal transduction events in an effort to elucidate cell behaviors during tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>21659381<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling increases the vulnerability to atrial fibrillation (AF). Some gene expressions are crucial for the metabolism of ECM. The left atrium plays an important role in maintaining AF. However, most studies investigated only the right atrial tissue. We therefore chose human tissue samples from both the left and right atrial to detect the different gene expressions during structural remodeling in AF. The atrial appendages tissue samples from 24 patients with chronic AF and 12 patients with sinus rhythm were obtained when they were undergoing mitral/aortic valve replacement operation. The mRNA levels of matrix metalloproteinases-9 (MMP-9), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1), disintegrin, metalloproteases-15, and integrins β1 were determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In AF group, the level of MMP-9 in left atrial appendage (LAA) was increased (P&lt; 0.001), while integrin β1 level was decreased (P&lt; 0.05) compared with those expressed in right atrial appendage (RAA) tissue. The levels of disintegrin, metalloproteinases-15, and TIMP-1 genes in the LAA and RAA had no significant differences. The results demonstrated that the gene expressions in the LAA and RAA are different during AF, which implied that the mechanism of atrial structural remodeling in AF is due to multiple sources and is complicated.<newchar><newabs>24117905<newchar>Non-host resistance (NHR) is a most durable broad-spectrum resistance employed by the plants to restrict majority of pathogens. Plant extracellular matrix (ECM) is a critical defense barrier. Understanding ECM responses during interaction with non-host pathogen will provide insights into molecular events of NHR. In this study, the ECM-associated proteome was compared during interaction of citrus with pathogen Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac) and non-host pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) at 8, 16, 24 and 48 h post inoculation. Comprehensive analysis of ECM-associated proteins was performed by extracting wall-bound and soluble ECM components using both destructive and non-destructive procedures. A total of 53 proteins was differentially expressed in citrus-Xanthomonas host and non-host interaction, out of which 44 were identified by mass spectrometry. The differentially expressed proteins were related to (1) defense-response (5 pathogenesis-related proteins, 3 miraculin-like proteins (MIR, MIR1 and MIR2) and 2 proteases); (2) enzymes of reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism [Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD), Fe-SOD, ascorbate peroxidase and 2-cysteine-peroxiredoxin]; (3) signaling (lectin, curculin-like lectin and concanavalin A-like lectin kinase); and (4) cell-wall modification (α-xylosidase, glucan 1, 3 β-glucosidase, xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase). The decrease in ascorbate peroxidase and cysteine-peroxiredoxin could be involved in maintenance of ROS levels. Increase in defense, cell-wall remodeling and signaling proteins in citrus-Xoo interaction suggests an active involvement of ECM in execution of NHR. Partially compromised NHR in citrus against Xoo, upon Brefeldin A pre-treatment supported the role of non-classical secretory proteins in this phenomenon.<newchar><newabs>24993046<newchar>Historically, the tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) were considered monochromatic in function. However, differential TIMP profiles more recently observed with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction and matrix remodeling suggest more diverse biological roles for individual TIMPs. This study tested the hypothesis that cardiac-specific overexpression (TIMP-4OE) or deletion (knockout; TIMP-4KO) would differentially affect LV function and structure following pressure overload (LVPO). LVPO (transverse aortic constriction) was induced in mice (3.5 ± 0.1 mo of age, equal sex distribution) with TIMP-4OE (n = 38), TIMP-4KO (n = 24), as well as age/strain-matched wild type (WT, n = 25), whereby indexes of LV remodeling and function such as LV mass and ejection fraction (LVEF) were determined at 28 days following LVPO. Following LVPO, both early (7 days) and late (28 days) survival was ~25% lower in the TIMP-4KO group (P &lt; 0.05). While LVPO increased LV mass in all groups, the relative hypertrophic response was attenuated with TIMP-4OE. With LVPO, LVEF was similar between WT and TIMP-4KO (48 ± 2% and 45 ± 3%, respectively) but was higher with TIMP-4OE (57 ± 2%, P &lt; 0.05). With LVPO, LV myocardial collagen expression (type I, III) increased by threefold in all groups (P &lt; 0.05), but surprisingly this response was most robust in the TIMP-4KO group. These unique findings suggest that increased myocardial TIMP-4 in the context of a LVPO stimulus may actually provide protective effects with respect to survival, LV function, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. These findings challenge the canonical belief that increased levels of specific myocardial TIMPs, such as TIMP-4 in and of themselves, contribute to adverse ECM accumulation following a pathological stimulus, such as LVPO.<newchar>pressure-overload hypertrophy<n-term>remodeling<n-term>tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase<n-term><newabs>22277993<newchar>CNS lesions generally result in impaired function because regeneration of the adult CNS of mammals is poor. A variety of lesion models has been described that serve to further the understanding of the pathophysiology of the damaged tissue. A central cause of aborted regeneration is the glial scar that expresses a plethora of extracellular matrix molecules. Some of these are considered inhibitors of axon growth and regeneration. The laser lesion of the cortex offers the advantage that a circumscribed lesion of defined energy can be delivered to the cortex non-invasively through the intact dura mater and a thinly drilled wet translucent remnant of the skull. Previously, we have shown that distinct ECM is up-regulated in the penumbra of laser lesions in the rat visual cortex. We propose to transfer this model to the mouse, in view of the availability of a large number of genetical models in this small rodent. Here, we discuss this model and the lesion-related ECM that forms the focus of our analysis.<newchar><newabs>22325265<newchar>Cellular mechanical properties have emerged as central regulators of many critical cell behaviors, including proliferation, motility, and differentiation. Although investigators have developed numerous techniques to influence these properties indirectly by engineering the extracellular matrix (ECM), relatively few tools are available to directly engineer the cells themselves. Here we present a genetic strategy for obtaining graded, dynamic control over cellular mechanical properties by regulating the expression of mutant mechanotransductive proteins from a single copy of a gene placed under a repressible promoter. With the use of constitutively active mutants of RhoA GTPase and myosin light chain kinase, we show that varying the expression level of either protein produces graded changes in stress fiber assembly, traction force generation, cellular stiffness, and migration speed. Using this approach, we demonstrate that soft ECMs render cells maximally sensitive to changes in RhoA activity, and that by modulating the ability of cells to engage and contract soft ECMs, we can dynamically control cell spreading, migration, and matrix remodeling. Thus, in addition to providing quantitative relationships between mechanotransductive signaling, cellular mechanical properties, and dynamic cell behaviors, this strategy enables us to control the physical interactions between cells and the ECM and thereby dictate how cells respond to matrix properties.<newchar><newabs>21744298<newchar>Obesity-induced remodeling of cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) leads to myocardial fibrosis and ultimately diastolic dysfunction. Leptin, an adipocyte hormone, is emerging as a novel mechanistic link between obesity and heart diseases. Despite the known essential role of leptin in hepatic and renal fibrosis, the in vivo effects of leptin on cardiac ECM remodeling remain unclear. Our objective was to define the role of leptin as a key mediator of pro-fibrogenic responses in the heart. In vitro administration of leptin to primary cardiofibroblasts resulted in significant stimulation of pro-collagen Iα ( 1 ) and a decrease in pro-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-8, -9 and -13 gene expressions at 24 h. To study the in vivo pro-fibrotic effect, leptin was administrated to C57BL/6 and leptin-deficient ob/ob mice for 8 weeks. With exogenous leptin ob/ob mice displayed passive diastolic filling dysfunction, coincided with significant increase in myocardial collagen compared with ob/ob controls. We also observed a marked stimulation of pro-collagen IIIα ( 1 ) and suppression of pro-MMP-8, TIMP-1 and -3 gene expressions in leptin-treated ob/ob mice. Our findings suggest pro-fibrotic effects of leptin in the heart, primarily through the predominance of collagen synthesis over degradation.<newchar><newabs>26475735<newchar>High pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), proximal pulmonary artery (PA) impedance, and right ventricular (RV) afterload due to remodeling contribute to the pathogenesis and severity of pulmonary hypertension (PH). Intra-amniotic exposure to endotoxin (ETX) causes sustained PH and high mortality in rat pups at birth, which are associated with impaired vascular growth and RV hypertrophy in survivors. Treatment of ETX-exposed pups with antenatal vitamin D (vit D) improves survival and lung growth, but the effects of ETX exposure on RV-PA coupling in the neonatal lung are unknown. We hypothesized that intrauterine ETX impairs RV-PA coupling through sustained abnormalities of PA stiffening and RV performance that are attenuated with vit D therapy. Fetal rats were exposed to intra-amniotic injections of ETX, ETX+vit D, or saline at 20 days gestation (term = 22 days). At postnatal day 14, pups had pressure-volume measurements of the RV and isolated proximal PA, respectively. Lung homogenates were assayed for extracellular matrix (ECM) composition by Western blot. We found that ETX lungs contain decreased α-elastin, lysyl oxidase, collagen I, and collagen III proteins (P &lt; 0.05) compared control and ETX+vit D lungs. ETX-exposed animals have increased RV mechanical stroke work (P &lt; 0.05 vs. control and ETX+vit D) and elastic potential energy (P &lt; 0.05 vs. control and ETX+vit D). Mechanical stiffness and ECM remodeling are increased in the PA (P &lt; 0.05 vs. control and ETX+vit D). We conclude that intrauterine exposure of fetal rats to ETX during late gestation causes persistent impairment of RV-PA coupling throughout infancy that can be prevented with early vit D treatment.<newchar>arterial stiffening<n-term>bronchopulmonary dysplasia<n-term>chorioamnionitis<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>vascular remodeling<n-term><newabs>24163072<newchar>Previous studies have established integrins as cell surface receptors that mediate cardiomyocyte-extracellular matrix (ECM) attachments. This study sought to determine the contributions of the myocardial β1- and β3-integrin subunits to ventricular dilatation and coronary flow regulation using a blood-perfused isolated heart preparation. Furthermore, cardiomyocyte adhesion to collagen types I and IV, fibronectin, and laminin with and without a β1-integrin subunit neutralizing antibody was assessed during the course of remodeling secondary to a sustained cardiac volume overload, including the onset of heart failure. Isolated cardiomyocytes were obtained during the initial, compensated, and decompensated phases of remodeling resulting from an aortocaval fistula created in 8-wk-old male Sprague-Dawley rats. Blocking the β1-integrin subunit in isolated normal hearts produced ventricular dilatation, whereas this was not the case when the β3-subunit was blocked. Substantial reductions in cardiomyocyte adhesion coincided with the previously documented development of ventricular dilatation and decreased contractility postfistula, with the β1-integrin contribution to adhesion ranging from 28% to 73% over the course of remodeling being essentially substrate independent. In contrast, both integrin subunits were found to be involved in regulating coronary vascular resistance. It is concluded that marked reductions in integrin-mediated cardiomyocyte adhesion to the ECM play a significant role in the progression of adverse myocardial remodeling that leads to heart failure. Furthermore, although both the β1- and β3-integrin subunits were involved in regulating coronary vascular resistance, only inhibition of β1-integrin-mediated adhesion resulted in ventricular dilatation of the normal heart.<newchar>aortocaval fistula<n-term>collagen types I and IV<n-term>coronary flow<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>heart failure<n-term>laminin<n-term>ventricular remodeling<n-term>β1- and β3-integrin subunits<n-term><newabs>27158396<newchar>Growing evidences suggest that there are close associations between anthocyanins and cardiac protection. However, little is known about the detailed roles of anthocyanins in regulating extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Incubation of primary cultured fibroblasts with anthocyanins reduced both intracellular collagen expression and extracellular collagen secretion. Down-regulation of collagen production was also shown in infarcted cardiac tissues after permanent coronary artery ligation in mice treated with anthocyanins. The phosphorylation levels of Akt and/or P-38 were significantly increased by anthocyanins supplementation in primary cultured fibroblasts. Gelatin zymography analysis of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity in conditioned medium collected from fibroblasts demonstrated that anthocyanins treatment significantly reduced MMP-2 activity. These results demonstrated that anthocyanins play a role in mediating myocardial ECM remodeling and that the Akt/P-38 pathways mediate these protective effects on hearts.<newchar>Extra cellular remodeling<n-term>MMPs<n-term>anthocyanins<n-term>fibroblasts<n-term>infracted heart<n-term><newabs>23484168<newchar>This experiment was conducted to study the histologic feasibility and biologic impact of Ti02 impregnation of an extracellullar matrix (ECM) membrane in guided bone regeneration. Eighteen adult New Zealand White rabbits were used. Bilateral bone defects were created in edentulous areas of the maxilla. The defects were filled with demineralized freeze-dried bone (DFDB). ECM was randomly pretreated with a suspension containing saline and 3 mg Ti02 granules. A regular ECM membrane served as a control on the contralateral side. Healing periods were 2, 4, and 8 weeks. Histologic and histomorphometric analyses were performed. The parameters assessed were (1) zone of inflammatory cells adjacent to ECM membrane, (2) presence of cellullar ingrowth into ECM, and (3) presence of Ti02 particles within the ECM barrier membrane. In general, no adverse reactions toward both groups of ECM membranes could be noted. The Ti02 particles remained within the ECM after 8 weeks of healing, making histologic detection of ECM easy. Histomorphometric analysis revealed low numbers of inflammatory cells adjacent to the ECM surface and adequate preservation and integration of the barrier. Contrasting Ti02 particles impregnated into the ECM membrane can be a very useful tool for the detection of similar biologic materials in in vivo models.<newchar><newabs>24913186<newchar>The replacement of diseased tissues with biological substitutes with suitable biomechanical properties is one of the most important goal in tissue engineering. Collagen represents a satisfactory choice for scaffolds. Unfortunately, the lack of elasticity represents a restriction to a wide use of collagen for several applications. In this work, we studied the effect of human elastin-like polypeptide (HELP) as hybrid collagen-elastin matrices. In particular, we studied the biomechanical properties of collagen/HELP scaffolds considering several components involved in ECM remodeling (elastin, collagen, fibrillin, lectin-like receptor, metalloproteinases) and cell phenotype (myogenin, myosin heavy chain) with particular awareness for vascular tissue engineering applications. Elastin and collagen content resulted upregulated in collagen-HELP matrices, even showing an improved structural remodeling through the involvement of proteins to a ECM remodeling activity. Moreover, the hybrid matrices enhanced the contractile activity of C2C12 cells concurring to improve the mechanical properties of the scaffold. Finally, small-angle X-ray scattering analyses were performed to enable a very detailed analysis of the matrices at the nanoscale, comparing the scaffolds with native blood vessels. In conclusion, our work shows the use of recombinant HELP, as a very promising complement able to significantly improve the biomechanical properties of three-dimensional collagen matrices in terms of tensile stress and elastic modulus.<newchar>C2C12<n-term>collagen scaffold<n-term>extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>human elastin-like polypeptide<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term><newabs>22159414<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is dynamically remodeled by cells during development, normal tissue homeostasis and in a variety of disease processes. We previously showed that fibronectin is an important regulator of ECM remodeling. The deposition and/or polymerization of fibronectin into the ECM controls the deposition and stability of other ECM molecules. In addition, agents that inhibit fibronectin polymerization promote the turnover of fibronectin fibrils and enhance ECM fibronectin endocytosis and intracellular degradation. Endocytosis of ECM fibronectin is regulated by β1 integrins, including α5β1 integrin. We have examined the role of extracellular proteases in regulating ECM fibronectin turnover. Our data show that membrane type matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MT1-MMP; also known as MMP14) is a crucial regulator of fibronectin turnover. Cells lacking MT1-MMP show reduced turnover and endocytosis of ECM fibronectin. MT1-MMP regulates ECM fibronectin remodeling by promoting extracellular cleavage of fibronectin and by regulating α5β1-integrin endocytosis. Our data also show that fibronectin polymerization stabilizes fibronectin fibrils and inhibits ECM fibronectin endocytosis by inhibiting α5β1-integrin endocytosis. These data are the first to show that an ECM protein and its modifying enzyme can regulate integrin endocytosis. These data also show that integrin trafficking plays a major role in modulating ECM fibronectin remodeling. The dual dependence of ECM fibronectin turnover on extracellular proteolysis and endocytosis highlights the complex regulatory mechanisms that control ECM remodeling to ensure maintenance of proper tissue function.<newchar><newabs>26985938<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is the major macromolecule in skeletal muscle, which affects meat quality greatly. The remodeling of the ECM is mainly regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The expression patterns of MMP-1, -2, and -8 in longissimus dorsi muscle were explored using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The results show that the expression of MMP-1, -2, and -8 decreased significantly from 135 days of pregnancy to postnatal 30 months. While the expression of MMP-1, -2, and -8 showed no significant relationships with intramuscular fat contents, MMP-1 and -2 showed significant negative correlations with the shearing force of the longissimus dorsi muscle in cattle. The expression of MMP-1 also showed a significant negative correlation with cooking loss and a positive correlation with water holding capacity. The expression levels of MMP-1 and -2 were usually higher in fat than in skeletal muscle tissue. The expression of MMP-8 was significantly higher in the mammary fat pad and the longissimus dorsi muscle than in all other tissues. This study indicates that the remodeling of the ECM has important effects both on the development of postnatal skeletal muscle and on meat quality.<newchar><newabs>25730114<newchar>The protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica causes a wide spectrum of intestinal infections. In severe cases, the trophozoites can breach the mucosal barrier, invade the intestinal epithelium and travel via the portal circulation to the liver, where they cause hepatic abscesses, which can prove fatal if left untreated. The host Extra Cellular Matrix (ECM) plays a crucial role in amoebic invasion by triggering an array of cellular responses in the parasite, including induction of actin rich adhesion structures. Similar actin rich protrusive structures, known as 'invadosomes', promote chemotactic migration of the metastatic cancer cells and non-transformed cells by remodeling the ECM. Recent studies showed a central role for Rab GTPases, the master regulators of vesicular trafficking, in biogenesis of invadosomes. Here, we showed that fibronectin, a major host ECM component induced actin remodeling in the parasite in a Rab21 dependent manner. The focalized actin structures formed were reminiscent of the mammalian invadosomes. By using various approaches, such as immunofluorescence confocal microscopy and scanning electron microscopy, along with in vitro invasion assay and matrix degradation assay, we show that the fibronectin induced formation of amoebic actin dots depend on the nucleotide status of the GTPase. The ECM components, fibronectin and collagen type I, displayed differential control over the formation of actin dots, with fibronectin positively and collagen type I negatively modulating it. The cell surface adhesion molecule Gal/GalNAc complex was also found to impose additional regulation on this process, which might have implication in collagen type I mediated suppression of actin dots.<newchar><newabs>21180881<newchar>Pulmonary remodeling is an important feature of asthma physiopathology that can contribute to irreversible changes in lung function. Although neurokinins influence lung inflammation, their exact role in the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling remains to be determined. Our objective was to investigate whether inactivation of capsaicin-sensitive nerves modulates pulmonary ECM remodeling in animals with chronic lung inflammation. After 14 days of capsaicin (50 mg/kg, sc) or vehicle administration, male Hartley guinea pigs weighing 250-300 g were submitted to seven inhalations of increasing doses of ovalbumin (1, 2.5, and 5 mg/mL) or saline for 4 weeks. Seventy-two hours after the seventh inhalation, animals were anesthetized and mechanically ventilated and the lung mechanics and collagen and elastic fiber content in the airways, vessels and lung parenchyma were evaluated. Ovalbumin-exposed animals presented increasing collagen and elastic fiber content, respectively, in the airways (9.2 ± 0.9; 13.8 ± 1.2), vessels (19.8 ± 0.8; 13.4 ± 0.5) and lung parenchyma (9.2 ± 0.9; 13.8 ± 1.2) compared to control (P &lt; 0.05). Capsaicin treatment reduced collagen and elastic fibers, respectively, in airways (1.7 ± 1.1; 7.9 ± 1.5), vessels (2.8 ± 1.1; 4.4 ± 1.1) and lung tissue (2.8 ± 1.1; 4.4 ± 1.1) of ovalbumin-exposed animals (P &lt; 0.05). These findings were positively correlated with lung mechanical responses to antigenic challenge (P &lt; 0.05). In conclusion, inactivation of capsaicin-sensitive nerve fibers reduces pulmonary remodeling, particularly collagen and elastic fibers, which contributes to the attenuation of pulmonary functional parameters.<newchar><newabs>25107701<newchar>Long acting β₂-agonists (LABA) have been reported to modify the extracellular matrix (ECM) composition in the airway wall. Based on our earlier studies we here investigated the mechanism underlying the control of ECM modification by LABA in primary human airway smooth muscle cells. Cells were treated with formoterol or salmeterol (30 min) before TGF-β₁ stimulation (2-3 days) Using RT-PCT, immuno-blotting and ELISA the de novo synthesis and deposition of collagen type-I, -III, -IV and fibronectin were determined. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and -9 were analyzed by zymography. Both LABA activated cAMP and its corresponding transcription factor CREB within 60 min and thus partly reduced TGF-β₁-induced gene transcription of collagen type-I, -III, fibronectin and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). The inhibitory effect of both LABA on collagen type-I and -III deposition involved a cAMP dependent mechanism, while the inhibitory effect of the two drugs on TGF-β1-induced fibronectin deposition and on CTGF secretion was independent of cAMP. Interestingly, none of the two LABA reduced CTGF-induced synthesis of collagen type-I or type-III deposition. In addition, none of the two LABA modified collagen type-IV deposition or the expression and activity of MMP-2 or MMP-9. Our results show that LABA can prevent de novo deposition of specific ECM components through cAMP dependent and independent signaling. However, they do not reduce all ECM components by the same mechanism and they do not reduce existing collagen deposits. This might explain some of the controversial reports on the anti-remodeling effect of LABA in chronic inflammatory lung diseases.<newchar>Airway remodeling<n-term>Airway smooth muscle cells<n-term>Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Long acting beta2-agonists<n-term><newabs>23989715<newchar>In contrast to public perception, the morbidity and mortality and the resultant healthcare costs associated with chronic heart failure (HF) are increasing and arguably reaching epidemic proportions. Although basic research efforts have provided unique insights into fundamental processes that govern myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) growth and function, the translation of these findings to improved diagnostics and therapeutics for HF has not been as forthcoming. The factors that contribute to this relative paucity of new clinical tools for HF are multifactorial but likely include the need to recognize and differentiate HF phenotypes and to couple the use of biomarkers and multimodality imaging in early translational research studies. Recognizing the classification scheme of HF with a reduced ejection fraction (EF) to that of HF with a preserved EF and incorporating unique and differential measurements of ECM remodeling to these specific disease processes are warranted. For example, profiling pathways of ECM degradation such as the matrix metalloproteinases in patients with ischemic heart disease and HF with a reduced EF can provide prognostic information in terms of risk of progression to HF. In patients with chronic hypertensive disease and HF with a preserved EF, plasma profiling indexes of ECM synthesis and turnover, as well as advances in ECM imaging, have been shown to provide diagnostic and prognostic use. In terms of therapeutics, strategies to stabilize the ECM in HF with a reduced EF hold potential, whereas in contradistinction, selective antifibrotic agents may hold promise for HF with a preserved EF.<newchar>cardiovascular diseases<n-term>diagnostics<n-term>myocardial remodeling<n-term>therapeutics<n-term>ventricular function<n-term><newabs>26163443<newchar>During dermal wound repair, hypoxia-driven proliferation results in dense but highly permeable, disorganized microvascular networks, similar to those in solid tumors. Concurrently, activated dermal fibroblasts generate an angiopermissive, provisional extracellular matrix (ECM). Unlike cancers, wounds naturally resolve via blood vessel regression and ECM maturation, which are essential for reestablishing tissue homeostasis. Mechanisms guiding wound resolution are poorly understood; one candidate regulator is pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a secreted glycoprotein. PEDF is a potent antiangiogenic in models of pathological angiogenesis and a promising cancer and cardiovascular disease therapeutic, but little is known about its physiological function. To examine the roles of PEDF in physiological wound repair, we used a reproducible model of excisional skin wound healing in BALB/c mice. We show that PEDF is abundant in unwounded and healing skin, is produced primarily by dermal fibroblasts, binds to resident microvascular endothelial cells, and accumulates in dermal ECM and epidermis. PEDF transcript and protein levels were low during the inflammatory and proliferative phases of healing but increased in quantity and colocalization with microvasculature during wound resolution. Local antibody inhibition of endogenous PEDF delayed vessel regression and collagen maturation during the remodeling phase. Treatment of wounds with intradermal injections of exogenous, recombinant PEDF inhibited nascent angiogenesis by repressing endothelial proliferation, promoted vascular integrity and function, and increased collagen maturity. These results demonstrate that PEDF contributes to the resolution of healing wounds by causing regression of immature blood vessels and stimulating maturation of the vascular microenvironment, thus promoting a return to tissue homeostasis after injury.<newchar>PEDF/SERPINF1<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>vessel regression<n-term>wound healing<n-term><newabs>24464727<newchar>The physical effects of fatigue failure caused by cyclic strain are important and for most materials well understood. However, nothing is known about this mode of failure in living cells. We developed a novel method that allowed us to apply controlled levels of cyclic displacement to networks of osteocytes in bone. We showed that under cyclic loading, fatigue failure takes place in the dendritic processes of osteocytes at cyclic strain levels as low as one tenth of the strain needed for instantaneous rupture. The number of cycles to failure was inversely correlated with the strain level. Further experiments demonstrated that these failures were not artefacts of our methods of sample preparation and testing, and that fatigue failure of cell processes also occurs in vivo. This work is significant as it is the first time it has been possible to conduct fatigue testing on cellular material of any kind. Many types of cells experience repetitive loading which may cause failure or damage requiring repair. It is clinically important to determine how cyclic strain affects cells and how they respond in order to gain a deeper understanding of the physiological processes stimulated in this manner. The more we understand about the natural repair process in bone the more targeted the intervention methods may become if disruption of the repair process occurred. Our results will help to understand how the osteocyte cell network is disrupted in the vicinity of matrix damage, a crucial step in bone remodelling.<newchar><newabs>22014525<newchar>Although expansion of CAG repeats in ATAXIN1 (ATXN1) causes Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, the functions of ATXN1 and ATAXIN1-Like (ATXN1L) remain poorly understood. To investigate the function of these proteins, we generated and characterized Atxn1L(-/-) and Atxn1(-/-); Atxn1L(-/-) mice. Atxn1L(-/-) mice have hydrocephalus, omphalocele, and lung alveolarization defects. These phenotypes are more penetrant and severe in Atxn1(-/-); Atxn1L(-/-) mice, suggesting that ATXN1 and ATXN1L are functionally redundant. Upon pursuing the molecular mechanism, we discovered that several Matrix metalloproteinase (Mmp) genes are overexpressed and that the transcriptional repressor Capicua (CIC) is destabilized in Atxn1L(-/-) lungs. Consistent with this, Cic deficiency causes lung alveolarization defect. Loss of either ATXN1L or CIC derepresses Etv4, an activator for Mmp genes, thereby mediating MMP9 overexpression. These findings demonstrate a critical role of ATXN1/ATXN1L-CIC complexes in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during development and their potential roles in pathogenesis of disorders affecting ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26579497<newchar>Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women and the most lethal gynecological malignancy. Extracellular matrix (ECM) is an integral component of both the normal and tumor microenvironment. ECM composition varies between tissues and is crucial for maintaining normal function and homeostasis. Dysregulation and aberrant deposition or loss of ECM components is implicated in ovarian cancer progression. The mechanisms by which tumor cells induce ECM remodeling to promote a malignant phenotype are yet to be elucidated. A thorough understanding of the role of the ECM in ovarian cancer is needed for the development of effective biomarkers and new therapies.<newchar>collagen<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>ovarian cancer<n-term>proteases<n-term>proteoglycan<n-term><newabs>23261934<newchar>Fibrous development of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of cardiac valves is necessary for proper heart function. Pathological remodeling of valve ECM is observed in both pediatric and adult cardiac disorders. It is well established that intracardiac hemodynamics play a significant role in the morphogenesis of cardiovascular tissues. However, the mechanisms that transduce mechanical forces into morphogenetic processes are not well understood. Here, we report the development of a three-dimensional, in vitro culture system that allows for culture of embryonic valve tissue under specific pulsatile flow conditions. This system was used to investigate the role that fluid flow plays in fibrous ECM expression during valve formation and to test the underlying cellular mechanisms that regulate this mechanotransduction. When cultured under pulsatile flow, developing valve tissues upregulated fibrous ECM expression at both the transcript and protein levels in comparison to no-flow controls. Flow-cultured valve tissues also underwent morphological development, as cushions elongated into leaflet-like structures that were absent in no-flow controls. Furthermore, rhoA, a member of the cytoskeletal actin-regulating GTPase family of proteins, was upregulated and activated by flow culture. Inhibition of the downstream rhoA effector kinase, ROCK, blocked flow-driven fibrous ECM accumulation and tissue stiffening, while the addition of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a rhoA activator, stimulated fibrous ECM deposition and tissue stiffening. These results support a prominent role for the rhoA pathway in the mechanotransduction of hemodynamic forces during fibrous remodeling of developing valve tissue. Our results also point to a potential link between regulation of the actinomyosin cytoskeleton and fibrous ECM synthesis in cardiovascular tissues.<newchar><newabs>23174564<newchar>While the term &quot;fibrosis&quot; can be misleading in terms of the complex patterns and processes of myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, fibrillar collagen accumulation is a common consequence of relevant pathophysiological stimuli, such as pressure overload (PO) and myocardial infarction (MI). Fibrillar collagen accumulation in both PO and MI is predicated on a number of diverse cellular and extracellular events, which include changes in fibroblast phenotype (transdifferentiation), posttranslational processing and assembly, and finally, degradation. The expansion of a population of transformed fibroblasts/myofibroblasts is a significant cellular event with respect to ECM remodeling in both PO and MI. The concept that this cellular expansion within the myocardial ECM may be due, at least in part, to endothelial-mesenchymal transformation and thereby not dissimilar to events observed in cancer progression holds intriguing future possibilities. Studies regarding determinants of procollagen processing, such as procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer (PCOLCE), and collagen assembly, such as the secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), have identified potential new targets for modifying the fibrotic response in both PO and MI. Finally, the transmembrane matrix metalloproteinases, such as MMP-14, underscore the diversity and complexity of this ECM proteolytic family as this protease can degrade the ECM as well as induce a profibrotic response. The growing recognition that the myocardial ECM is a dynamic entity containing a diversity of matricellular and nonstructural proteins as well as proteases and that the fibrillar collagens can change in structure and content in a rapid temporal fashion has opened up new avenues for modulating what was once considered an irreversible event--myocardial fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>23315238<newchar>Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) ameliorate heart failure by reducing preload and afterload. However, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition after application of LVADs is not clearly defined. The purpose of the present study was to investigate ECM remodeling after mechanical unloading in a rat heart transplant model. Sixty male Lewis rats were subjected to abdominal heterotopic heart transplantation, and the transplanted hearts were pressure- and volume-unloaded. The age- and weight- matched male Lewis rats who had undergone open thoracic surgeries were used as the control. Left ventricle ECM accumulation and the expression/activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) were measured on the third, seventh, and fourteenth days after transplantation/sham surgery. Compared with the control group, myocardial ECM deposition significantly increased on the seventh and fourteenth days after heart transplantation (P &lt; 0.05) and peaked on the 14th day. The gelatinase activity as well as mRNA expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 significantly increased after transplantation (P &lt; 0.05). Both mRNA and protein levels of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 significantly increased compared with those of the control group. Mechanical unloading may lead to adverse remodeling of the ECM of the left ventricle. The underlying mechanism may due to the imbalance of the MMP/TIMP system, especially the remarkable upregulation of TIMPs in the pressure and volume unloaded heart.<newchar><newabs>21980363<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a key component of cell migration and tumor metastasis, and has been associated with cancer progression. Despite the importance of matrix remodeling, systematic and quantitative studies on the process have largely been lacking. Furthermore, it remains unclear if the disrupted tensional homeostasis characteristic of malignancy is due to initially altered ECM and tissue properties, or to the alteration of the tissue by tumor cells. To explore these questions, we studied matrix remodeling by two different prostate cancer cell lines in a three-dimensional collagen system. Over one week, we monitored structural changes in gels of varying collagen content using confocal reflection microscopy and quantitative image analysis, tracking metrics of fibril fraction, pore size, and fiber length and diameter. Gels that were seeded with no cells (control), LNCaP cells, and DU-145 cells were quantitatively compared. Gels with higher collagen content initially had smaller pore sizes and higher fibril fractions, as expected. However, over time, LNCaP- and DU-145-populated matrices showed different structural properties compared both to each other and to the control gels, with LNCaP cells appearing to favor microenvironments with lower collagen fiber fractions and larger pores than DU-145 cells. We posit that the DU-145 cells' preference for denser matrices is due to their higher invasiveness and proteolytic capabilities. Inhibition of matrix proteases resulted in reduced fibril fractions for high concentration gels seeded with either cell type, supporting our hypothesis. Our novel quantitative results probe the dynamics of gel remodeling in three dimensions and suggest that prostate cancer cells remodel their ECM in a synergistic manner that is dependent on both initial matrix properties as well as their invasiveness.<newchar><newabs>17965575<newchar>Airway remodeling in asthma is characterized by goblet cell hyperplasia, subepithelial fibrosis, and hyperplasia and hypertrophy of airway smooth muscle cells. The airway wall thickness increases because of subepithelial fibrosis, and hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the airway smooth muscle cells and submucosal glands. Airway remodeling, therefore, can often cause irreversible airflow limitation and an increase of airway hyperresponsiveness. Recent studies have described the molecular and cellular mechanisms of collagen deposition in the airway wall such as subepithelial fibrosis. Fibroblasts or myofibroblasts play a critical role in the exaggerated deposition of collagen in asthmatic airways. Bone marrow derived fibroblasts may play a role in fibrotic remodeling in asthmatic airways. Airway remodeling is induced by cytokines and mediators produced in chronic allergic airway inflammation. Since, once formed, remodeling is resistant to asthma therapy, early intervention with inhaled corticosteroid should be considered to prevent the progress of airway remodeling.<newchar><newabs>19279695<newchar>Intestinal metamorphosis in anurans is an excellent model system for studying post-embryonic tissue remodeling and organ development in vertebrates. This process involves degeneration of the larval or tadpole form of its primary functional tissue, the simple tubular epithelium through apoptosis or programmed cell death. Concurrently, adult epithelial stem cells, whose origin remains to be determined, proliferate and differentiate to form a multiply folded, complex adult epithelium. The connective tissue and muscles also develop extensively during this period. Like all other changes during amphibian metamorphosis, intestinal remodeling is controlled by thyroid hormone (TH). Isolation and characterization of genes that are regulated by TH has implicated the involvement of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during intestinal metamorphosis. Here we will review some studies, almost exclusively in Xenopus laevis, that support a role of MMPs, particularly stromelysin 3, and ECM remodeling in regulating cell fate and tissue morphogenesis.<newchar>Xenopus laevis<n-term>apoptosis<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>metamorphosis<n-term>thyroid hormone receptor<n-term><newabs>23873846<newchar>Surgical mesh devices composed of synthetic materials are commonly used for ventral hernia repair. These materials provide robust mechanical strength and are quickly incorporated into host tissue; factors that contribute to reduced hernia recurrence rates. However, such mesh devices cause a foreign body response with the associated complications of fibrosis and patient discomfort. In contrast, surgical mesh devices composed of naturally occurring extracellular matrix (ECM) are associated with constructive tissue remodeling, but lack the mechanical strength of synthetic materials. A method for applying a porcine dermal ECM hydrogel coating to a polypropylene mesh is described herein with the associated effects upon the host tissue response and biaxial mechanical behavior. Uncoated and ECM coated heavy-weight BARD™ Mesh were compared to the light-weight ULTRAPRO™ and BARD™ Soft Mesh devices in a rat partial thickness abdominal defect overlay model. The ECM coated mesh attenuated the pro-inflammatory response compared to all other devices, with a reduced cell accumulation and fewer foreign body giant cells. The ECM coating degraded by 35 days, and was replaced with loose connective tissue compared to the dense collagenous tissue associated with the uncoated polypropylene mesh device. Biaxial mechanical characterization showed that all of the mesh devices were of similar isotropic stiffness. Upon explanation, the light-weight mesh devices were more compliant than the coated or uncoated heavy-weight devices. This study shows that an ECM coating alters the default host response to a polypropylene mesh, but not the mechanical properties in an acute in vivo abdominal repair model.<newchar>coated surgical mesh<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>foreign body response<n-term>polypropylene<n-term>surgical mesh<n-term><newabs>26136073<newchar>The role of a stiffening extra-cellular matrix (ECM) in cancer progression is documented but poorly understood. Here we use a conditioning protocol to test the role of nonmuscle myosin II isoforms in cell mediated ECM arrangement using collagen constructs seeded with breast cancer cells expressing shRNA targeted to either the IIA or IIB heavy chain isoform. While there are several methods available to measure changes in the biophysical characteristics of the ECM, we wanted to use a method which allows for the measurement of global stiffness changes as well as a dynamic response from the sample over time. The conditioning protocol used allows the direct measurement of ECM stiffness. Using various treatments, it is possible to determine the contribution of various construct and cellular components to the overall construct stiffness. Using this assay, we show that both the IIA and IIB isoforms are necessary for efficient matrix remodeling by MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, as loss of either isoform changes the stiffness of the collagen constructs as measured using our conditioning protocol. Constructs containing only collagen had an elastic modulus of 0.40 Pascals (Pa), parental MDA-MB-231 constructs had an elastic modulus of 9.22 Pa, while IIA and IIB KD constructs had moduli of 3.42 and 7.20 Pa, respectively. We also calculated the cell and matrix contributions to the overall sample elastic modulus. Loss of either myosin isoform resulted in decreased cell stiffness, as well as a decrease in the stiffness of the cell-altered collagen matrices. While the total construct modulus for the IIB KD cells was lower than that of the parental cells, the IIB KD cell-altered matrices actually had a higher elastic modulus than the parental cell-altered matrices (4.73 versus 4.38 Pa). These results indicate that the IIA and IIB heavy chains play distinct and non-redundant roles in matrix remodeling.<newchar><newabs>25582403<newchar>Asthma is frequently caused and/or exacerbated by sensitization to allergens, which are ubiquitous in many indoor and outdoor environments. Severe asthma is characterized by airway hyperresponsiveness and bronchial constriction in response to an inhaled allergen, leading to a disease course that is often very difficult to treat with standard asthma therapies. As a result of interactions among inflammatory cells, structural cells, and the intercellular matrix of the allergic lung, patients with sensitization to allergens may experience a greater degree of tissue injury followed by airway wall remodeling and progressive, accumulated pulmonary dysfunction as part of the disease sequela. In addition, turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) components is a hallmark of tissue injury and repair. This review focuses on the role of the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA), a component of the ECM, in pulmonary injury and repair with an emphasis on allergic asthma. Both the synthesis and degradation of the ECM are critical contributors to tissue repair and remodeling. Fragmented HA accumulates during tissue injury and functions in ways distinct from the larger native polymer. There is gathering evidence that HA degradation products are active participants in stimulating the expression of inflammatory genes in a variety of immune cells at the injury site. In this review, we will consider recent advances in the understanding of the mechanisms that are associated with HA accumulation and inflammatory cell recruitment in the asthmatic lung.<newchar>Asthma<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Hyaluronan<n-term><newabs>19051303<newchar>Ligands presented on biomaterials are a common method to facilitate and control the host response. In a gelatin and polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGdA) based semi-interpenetrating network (sIPN), the effects of extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived peptide amount on monocyte adhesion and subsequent protein and mRNA expression were examined. Peptide amount on the sIPN surface was controlled by varying the wt % ratio of the peptide-PEG grafted gelatin to PEGdA. We hypothesized that increasing bioactive peptide amount would modulate human blood-derived monocyte adhesion, cytokine expression, and gene regulation. Monocyte adhesion, release of gelatin degrading proteases matrix metalloprotease-2 (MMP-2), matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9), and proinflammatory protein interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), and mRNA expression of these proteins were evaluated. We found RGD-PEG grafted sIPNs with higher surface RGD concentrations showed increased adherent density. MMP-2 and IL-1beta protein release was also influenced by the ligand concentration, as initial increase in protein concentration was observed at higher ligand concentrations. MMP-9 protein showed an initial increase that subsided then increased. A decreased IL-1beta protein and mRNA expression was observed over time but MMP-2 mRNA was not detected at any time though MMP-2 protein concentrations showed an initial burst. Hence, monocyte behavior was modulated by surface ligand identity in tandem with ligand concentration.<newchar><newabs>24321371<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis is an important pathological feature of cardiac remodeling in heart diseases. The molecular mechanisms of cardiac fibrosis are unknown. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that balance the acetylation activities of histone acetyltransferases on chromatin remodeling and play essential roles in regulating gene transcription. In recent years, the role of HDACs in cardiac fibrosis initiation and progression, as well as the therapeutic effects of HDAC inhibitors, has been well studied. Moreover, numerous studies indicated that HDAC activity is associated with the development and progression of cardiac fibrosis. In this review, the innovative aspects of HDACs are discussed, with respect to biogenesis, their role in cardiac fibrosis. Furthermore, the potential applications of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of cardiac fibrosis associated with fibroblast activation and proliferation.<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis<n-term>ECM<n-term>Epigenetic<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>FGF<n-term>Fibroblast<n-term>Fibroblast growth factor<n-term>HATs<n-term>HDACs<n-term>Histone acetyltransferases<n-term>Histone deacetylase<n-term>Histone deacetylases<n-term>Histone deacetylation<n-term>IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor<n-term>IGF-IIR/Man-6-P<n-term>MEF2<n-term>Myocyte enhancer factor-2<n-term>NRVMs<n-term>Neonatal rat ventricular myocytes<n-term>PDGF<n-term>PKD1<n-term>Platelet-derived growth factor<n-term>Proliferation<n-term>Protein kinase D1<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>Tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Transforming growth factor β1<n-term>α-SMA<n-term>α-smooth muscle actin<n-term><newabs>19524591<newchar>Volume overload-induced heart failure results in progressive left ventricular remodeling characterized by chamber dilation, eccentric cardiac myocyte hypertrophy and changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling changes. The ECM matrix scaffold is an important determinant of the structural integrity of the myocardium and actively participates in force transmission across the LV wall. In response to this hemodynamic overload, the ECM undergoes a distinct pattern of remodeling that differs from pressure overload. Once thought to be a static entity, the ECM is now regarded to be a highly adaptive structure that is dynamically regulated by mechanical stress, neurohormonal activation, inflammation and oxidative stress, that result in alterations in collagen and other matrix components and a net change in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activation. These changes dictate overall ECM turnover during volume overload hear failure progression. This review will discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms that dictate the temporal patterns of ECM remodeling during heart disease progression.<newchar><newabs>20412859<newchar>The structural reorganization of extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important feature of peripheral lung tissue remodeling in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Ordered ECM macromolecules such as the fibril-forming collagens produce second harmonic generation (SHG) signal without the need for any exogenous label, while ECM macromolecules such as the elastin fibers generate MPEF signal due to their endogenous fluorescence characteristics. Both these signals can be captured simultaneously to provide spatially resolved 3D structural reorganization of ECM matrix. In this study, SHG and MPEF microscopy methods were used to examine structural remodeling of the ECM matrix in human lung alveolar walls undergoing severe emphysematous destruction. Flash frozen lung samples removed from two patients undergoing lung transplantation for severe COPD (n=4) were compared to similar samples from an unused donor lung (n=2) that served as a control. The imaging operations were performed directly on these tissue sections at least three different areas. The generated spatially resolved 3D images showed the distribution of collagen and elastin in the alveolar walls. In the case of the control, we found well ordered alveolar walls with a composite type structure made up of collagen bands and relatively fine elastic fibers. In contrast, lung tissues undergoing emphysematous destruction were highly disorganized with significantly increased alveolar wall thickness compared to the control. We conclude that these non-invasive imaging modalities provide spatially resolved 3D images with spectral specificities that are sensitive enough to identity the ECM structural changes associated with emphysematous destruction.<newchar><newabs>25943026<newchar>1-[4-[2-(4-Bromobenzene-sulfonamino)ethyl]phenylsulfonyl]-3-(trans-4-methylcyclohexyl) urea (G004, CAS865483-06-3) is a synthetic sulfonylurea, incorporating the hypoglycemic active structure of glimepiride (CAS 93479-97-1) and anti-TXA2 receptor (TP) active structure of BM-531(CAS 284464-46-6). In this study, we evaluated the effect of G004 on hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia as well as diabetic nephropathy (DN) in db/db mice by gavage over 90 consecutive days of treatment. The fasting blood glucose (FBG), glucose, and insulin tolerance as well as dyslipidemia were effectively ameliorated in db/db mice treated with G004. Interestingly, renal histological results of db/db mice revealed that G004 markedly reversed the expansion of mesangial extracellular matrix (ECM), the early hallmark of DN. Indeed, G004 treatment downregulated the renal expressions of type 4 collagen (Col IV) and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) in db/db mice. In addition, imbalance in expressions of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and its tissue inhibitor-1 (TIMP-1) in db/db mice kidneys was observed. However, G004 increased and decreased the expressions of MMP-9 and TIMP-1, respectively. It is well known that TGF-β pathway signaling plays an essential role in hyperglycemia-induced cell protein synthesis. On the other hand, MMP/TIMP system is responsible for the breakdown and turnover of ECM. Thus, we speculate that G004 possibly attenuated ECM accumulation via remodeling the synthesis and degradation of ECM component Col IV through modulation in TGF-β1 and MMP-9/TIMP-1 expressions in kidneys of db/db mice. Results from this study provide a strong rationale for G004 to be an efficient glucose-controlling agent with significant reno-protective properties.<newchar><newabs>20662734<newchar>Worldwide, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death. Most CVD-related deaths are caused by years of preceding atherogenesis and the extensive development of atherosclerotic plaques, some of which may rupture to cause myocardial infarction. Macrophages are known to have a role in almost all stages of atherosclerosis, by both initiating atherosclerotic plaques and degrading them through the secretion of proteolytic enzymes leading to rupture. This review summarizes the literature on the role of macrophages and their proteolytic activity on proteins in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the atherosclerotic plaque with a view to suggest a novel approach for identification of vulnerable plaques and turnover by the use of a new type of biomarker. The PubMed database was searched using the terms macrophages, foam cells, atherosclerosis, CVD, ECM remodeling, biomarker, neoepitope, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and protease. Atherosclerotic plaques are primarily composed of the protein type I and III collagen, and smaller quantities of elastin and proteoglycans. Macrophages secrete an array of proteases, including MMPs, cathepsins, and aggrecanases, with the ability to degrade most of the constituents of the ECM of the atherosclerotic plaque. At present it is not clear which proteases play pivotal roles at distinct stages of pathogenesis, rather that the combined proteolytic potential with some proteases at early stages and other at later stages may result in plaque rupture. This macrophage-mediated proteolysis and remodeling of the ECM play important roles in many stages of atherosclerosis. The degradation fragments of these ECM events are specific neoepitopes, which are released into the circulation. The identification of these pathologically relevant neoepitopes leads to novel biomarkers able to identify the formation and degradation of plaques providing different biological information than traditionally used biomarkers.<newchar><newabs>26165921<newchar>Collective cell migration drives tissue remodeling during development, wound repair, and metastatic invasion. The physical mechanisms by which cells move cohesively through dense three-dimensional (3D) extracellular matrix (ECM) remain incompletely understood. Here, we show directly that migration of multicellular cohorts through collagenous matrices occurs via a dynamic pulling mechanism, the nature of which had only been inferred previously in 3D. Tensile forces increase at the invasive front of cohorts, serving a physical, propelling role as well as a regulatory one by conditioning the cells and matrix for further extension. These forces elicit mechanosensitive signaling within the leading edge and align the ECM, creating microtracks conducive to further migration. Moreover, cell movements are highly correlated and in phase with ECM deformations. Migrating cohorts use spatially localized, long-range forces and consequent matrix alignment to navigate through the ECM. These results suggest biophysical forces are critical for 3D collective migration.<newchar><newabs>24202060<newchar>Previously, we reported that millimeter wave promoted the chondrocyte proliferation by pushing cell cycle progression. Activation of K(+) channels plays an essential role in the stimulating of extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and the cell proliferation in chondrocytes. While it is unclear if millimeter wave enhances ECM synthesis and proliferation of chondrocytes by regulating K(+) channel activity, we here investigated the effects of millimeter waves on ECM synthesis, chondrocyte proliferation and ion channels in the primary chondrocyte culture. We found that millimeter waves led to the increase of chondrocyte viability, the morphological changes of chondrocyte, and the F-actin distortion and remodeling. Ultrastructural analysis showed that treated chondrocytes contained an expansion of mitochondria and granular endoplasmic reticulum, and a high number of cytoplasmic vesicles in the cytoplasm compared to untreated cells, suggesting millimeter waves increased the energy metabolism and protein synthesis of chondrocytes. The analysis of differential ion channels' genes expression further showed an obvious increase of Kcne1, Kcnj3 and Kcnq2. To determine the role of voltage-gated K(+) channel in chondrocyte, we blocked the voltage-gated K(+) channel with 10 mM tetraethylammonium (TEA) and treated chondrocytes with millimeter waves. The results indicated that TEA significantly negated the promotion of millimeter waves for the ECM synthesis and chondrocyte proliferation. Our results support the hypothesis that millimeter waves promote the synthesis of ECM and the proliferation of chondrocyte by regulating the voltage-gated K(+) channel.<newchar><newabs>19437738<newchar>Monocytes/macrophages and fibroblasts are recruited to the injury site and orchestrate the host response and tissue repair. We have previously shown that polyethylene glycol (PEG)-ylated arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) sequence grafted onto an extracellular matrix (ECM)-based semi-interpenetrating network (sIPN) enhances monocyte adhesion, and modulates subsequent gene expression and release of inflammatory and matrix remodeling factors. In this study, we investigate the direct influence of fibroblasts on monocyte response to this ECM mimic. Key wound-healing factors in inflammation, matrix remodeling, and regeneration were analyzed to gain insight into the interrelated role of regulation in fibroblast-monocyte interaction. Interleukin-1alpha/-1beta (IL-1alpha/-1beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor- alpha (TNF-alpha), monocyte inflammatory protein-1alpha/-1beta (MIP-1alpha/-1beta), transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha), monocyte chemoattractant factor (MCP-1), matrix metalloproteinase-2/-9 (MMP-2/-9), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) were analyzed. Fibroblasts decreased monocyte adhesion onto the RGD-grafted sIPN while increasing monocyte GM-CSF on all surfaces over time except for on RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN at 96 h. Monocytes decreased initial fibroblast IL-1alpha and TGF-alpha, but drastically increased fibroblast MMP-2 and GM-CSF. Monocyte IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, MIP-1beta, MCP-1, MMP-9, and GM-CSF expression was increased over time in the presence of all sIPNs, and when the sIPNs were immobilized with ligands, a down-regulation of fibroblast IL-1beta, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta compared with unmodified sIPN was observed. When the ligand immobilized was RGD, monocyte TGF-alpha, MIP-1beta, and VEGF expression was increased while monocyte GM-CSF was decreased at selected time points. These results showed a dynamic monocyte response to selected ECM components in the presence of fibroblasts.<newchar><newabs>25120494<newchar>Living tissue is composed of cells and extracellular matrix (ECM). In the heart and blood vessels, which are constantly subjected to mechanical stress, ECM molecules form well-developed fibrous frameworks to maintain tissue structure. ECM is also important for biological signaling, which influences various cellular functions in embryonic development, and physiological/pathological responses to extrinsic stimuli. Among ECM molecules, increased attention has been focused on matricellular proteins. Matricellular proteins are a growing group of non-structural ECM proteins highly up-regulated at active tissue remodeling, serving as biological mediators. Tenascin-C (TNC) is a typical matricellular protein, which is highly expressed during embryonic development, wound healing, inflammation, and cancer invasion. The expression is tightly regulated, dependent on the microenvironment, including various growth factors, cytokines, and mechanical stress. In the heart, TNC appears in a spatiotemporal-restricted manner during early stages of development, sparsely detected in normal adults, but transiently re-expressed at restricted sites associated with tissue injury and inflammation. Similarly, in the vascular system, TNC is strongly up-regulated during embryonic development and under pathological conditions with an increase in hemodynamic stress. Despite its intriguing expression pattern, cardiovascular system develops normally in TNC knockout mice. However, deletion of TNC causes acute aortic dissection (AAD) under strong mechanical and humoral stress. Accumulating reports suggest that TNC may modulate the inflammatory response and contribute to elasticity of the tissue, so that it may protect cardiovascular tissue from destructive stress responses. TNC may be a key molecule to control cellular activity during development, adaptation, or pathological tissue remodeling.<newchar>aortic dissection<n-term>coronary artery<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>heart<n-term>matricellular protein<n-term>mechanotrasduction<n-term>tenascin-C<n-term><newabs>26685054<newchar>Tumor necrosis factor-stimulated gene-6 (TSG-6) is a hyaluronan (HA)-binding protein that is essential for stabilizing and remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) during ovulation and inflammatory disease processes such as arthritis. The Link module, one of the domains of TSG-6, is responsible for binding hyaluronan and other glycosaminoglycans found in the ECM. In this study, we used a well-defined chondroitin sulfate (CS) hexasaccharide (ΔC444S) to determine the structure of the Link module, in solution, in its chondroitin sulfate-bound state. A variety of nuclear magnetic resonance techniques were employed, including chemical shift perturbation, residual dipolar couplings (RDCs), nuclear Overhauser effects, spin relaxation measurements, and paramagnetic relaxation enhancements from a spin-labeled analogue of ΔC444S. The binding site for ΔC444S on the Link module overlapped with that of HA. Surprisingly, ΔC444S binding induced dimerization of the Link module (as confirmed by analytical ultracentrifugation), and a second weak binding site that partially overlapped with a previously identified heparin site was detected. A dimer model was generated using chemical shift perturbations and RDCs as restraints in the docking program HADDOCK. We postulate that the molecular cross-linking enhanced by the multiple binding modes of the Link module might be critical for remodeling the ECM during inflammation/ovulation and might contribute to other functions of TSG-6.<newchar><newabs>25411389<newchar>Dynamic reciprocity (DR) refers to the ongoing, bidirectional interaction between cells and their microenvironment, specifically the extracellular matrix (ECM). The continuous remodeling of the ECM exerts mechanical force on cells and modifies biochemical mediators near the cell membrane, thereby initiating cell-signaling cascades that produce changes in gene expression and cell behavior. Cellular changes, in turn, affect the composition and organization of ECM components. These continuous interactions are the fundamental principle behind DR, and its critical role throughout development and adult tissue homeostasis has been extensively investigated. While DR in the mammary gland has been well described, we provide direct evidence that similar dynamic interactions occur in other areas of reproductive biology as well. In order to establish the importance of DR in the adaptive functioning of the female reproductive tract, we present our most current understanding of DR in reproductive tissues, exploring the mammary gland, ovary, and uterus. In addition to explaining normal physiological function, investigating DR may shed new light into pathologic processes that occur in these tissues and provide an exciting opportunity for novel therapeutic intervention.<newchar>breast<n-term>dynamic reciprocity (DR)<n-term>extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>fibroids<n-term>folliculogenesis<n-term>mechanotransduction (MT)<n-term>ovary<n-term>ovulation<n-term>pathogenesis<n-term>uterine leiomyoma<n-term><newabs>25114586<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is the complex network of proteins that surrounds cells in multicellular organisms. Due to its diverse nature and composition, the ECM has a multifaceted role in both normal tissue homeostasis and pathophysiology. It provides structural support, segregates tissues from one another, and regulates intercellular communication. Furthermore, the ECM sequesters a wide range of growth factors and cytokines that may be released upon specific and well-coordinated cues. Regulation of the ECM is performed by the extracellular proteases, which are tasked with cleaving and remodeling this intricate and diverse protein matrix. Accordingly, extracellular proteases are differentially expressed in various tissue types and in many diseases such as cancer. In fact, metastatic dissemination of tumor cells requires degradation of extracellular matrices by several families of proteases, including metalloproteinases and serine proteases, among others. Extracellular proteases are emerging as strong candidate cancer biomarkers for aiding and predicting patient outcome. Not surprisingly, inhibition of these protumorigenic enzymes in animal models of metastasis has shown impressive therapeutic effects. As such, many of these proteolytic inhibitors are currently in various phases of clinical investigation. In addition to direct approaches, aberrant expression of extracellular proteases in disease states may also facilitate the selective delivery of other therapeutic or imaging agents. Herein, we outline extracellular proteases that are either bona fide or probable prognostic markers in breast cancer. Furthermore, using existing patient data and multiple robust statistical analyses, we highlight several extracellular proteases and associated inhibitors (eg, uPA, ADAMs, MMPs, TIMPs, RECK) that hold the greatest potential as clinical biomarkers. With the recent advances in high-throughput technology and targeted therapies, the incorporation of extracellular protease status in breast cancer patient management may have a profound effect on improving outcomes in this deadly disease.<newchar>ADAMs<n-term>ECM<n-term>MMPs<n-term>RECK<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>uPA<n-term><newabs>24608113<newchar>Scar formation following skin injury can be a major psychosocial and physiological problem. However, the mechanisms of scar formation are still not completely understood. Previous studies have shown that wound healing in oral mucosa is faster, associates with a reduced inflammatory response and results to significantly reduced scar formation compared with skin wounds. In the present study, we hypothesized that oral mucosal fibroblasts from human gingiva are inherently distinct from fibroblasts from breast and abdominal skin, two areas prone to excessive scar formation, which may contribute to the preferential wound healing outcome in gingiva. To this end, we compared the phenotype of human gingival and skin fibroblasts cultured in in vivo-like three-dimensional (3D) cultures that mimic the cells' natural extracellular matrix (ECM) niche. To establish 3D cultures, five parallel fibroblast lines from human gingiva (GFBLs) and breast skin (SFBLs) were seeded in high density, and cultured for up to 21 days in serum and ascorbic acid containing medium to induce expression of wound-healing transcriptome and ECM deposition. Cell proliferation, morphology, phenotype and expression of wound healing and scar related genes were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunocytochemical methods. The expression of a set of genes was also studied in three parallel lines of human abdominal SFBLs. Findings showed that GFBLs displayed morphologically distinct organization of the 3D cultures and proliferated faster than SFBLs. GFBLs expressed elevated levels of molecules involved in regulation of inflammation and ECM remodeling (MMPs) while SFBLs showed significantly higher expression of TGF-β signaling, ECM and myofibroblast and cell contractility-related genes. Thus, GFBLs display an inherent phenotype conducive for fast resolution of inflammation and ECM remodeling, characteristic for scar-free wound healing, while SFBLs have a profibrotic, scar-prone phenotype.<newchar><newabs>27100510<newchar>The brain extracellular matrix (ECM) is involved in several aspects of neuronal development, plasticity, and pathophysiology. Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), consisting of core proteins with covalently attached chondroitin sulfate (CS) chains, are essential components of the brain ECM. During late postnatal development, CSPGs condense around parvalbumin-expressing inhibitory neurons (PV-cells) and form lattice-like ECM structures called perineuronal nets (PNNs). Enzymatic or genetic manipulation of PNNs reactivates neuronal plasticity in the adult brain, probably by resetting the excitatory/inhibitory balance in neural networks. Recent studies have indicated that PNNs control PV-cell function by enhancing the accumulation of specific proteins at the cell surface and/or acting as neuroprotective shields against oxidative stress. Since dysfunction of PV-cells and remodeling of CSPGs are commonly observed in several disorders, including schizophrenia, Costello syndrome, Alzheimer's disease, and epilepsy, modulation of PV-cell function by CSPGs may provide a novel strategy for these neuronal disorders. Here we review the potential roles of CSPGs as therapeutic targets for neuronal disorders, with particular focus on structural changes of CS chains under pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>24577967<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex architectural network consisting of structural and nonstructural proteins, creating strength and plasticity. The nonstructural compartment of the ECM houses a variety of proteins, which are vital for ECM plasticity, and can be divided into 3 major groups: glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans. The common denominator for these groups is glycosylation, which refers to the decoration of proteins or lipids with sugars. This review will discuss the fundamental role of the matrix in cardiac development, homeostasis, and remodeling, from a glycobiology point of view. Glycoproteins (eg, thrombospondins, secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine, tenascins), proteoglycans (eg, versican, syndecans, biglycan), and glycosaminoglycans (eg, hyaluronan, heparan sulfate) are upregulated on cardiac injury and regulate key processes in the remodeling myocardium such as inflammation, fibrosis, and angiogenesis. Albeit some parallels can be made regarding the processes these proteins are involved in, their specific functions are extremely diverse. In fact, under varying conditions, individual proteins can even have opposing functions, making spatiotemporal contribution of these proteins in the rearrangement of multifaceted ECM very hard to grasp. Alterations of protein characteristics by the addition of sugars may explain the immense, yet tightly regulated, variability of the remodeling cardiac matrix. Understanding the role of glycosylation in altering the ultimate function of glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans in the myocardium may lead to the development of new biochemical structures or compounds with great therapeutic potential for patients with heart disease.<newchar>glycoproteins<n-term>glycosaminoglycans<n-term>glycosylation<n-term>proteoglycans<n-term><newabs>23880643<newchar>Tissue fibrosis can lead to organ dysfunction, patient morbidity, and mortality. Adipose-derived Stromal/stem Cells (ASCs) represent a potential therapeutic. Immediately following grafting, ASCs would reside in a lower O2 environment. ASC secretome was examined under 5% O2 (&quot;low O2&quot;) and 21% O2 (&quot;ambient O2&quot;) culture conditions. ASCs from five female donors were cultured in low or ambient O2 conditions for 3 days and pooled conditioned medium was compared by two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS). Of 71 proteins identified, five proteins involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling exhibited ≥2-fold decrease under low O2 culture and were confirmed by Western immunoblot and qRT-PCR: fibronectin 1, TGF-β1-induced protein (βig-h3), osteonectin, and collagens type 1α1 and α2. ELISAs performed using 10 donors also confirmed significant decreases during low O2 culture in 4-6 ASC donors. For low abundant proteins, a 36 cytokine/chemokine array was performed. Fifteen cytokines/chemokines including Type 2 cytokines IL-13, MCP-1, and CD40 ligand were detected in ambient O2 ASC medium. IL-6 was detected in low O2 but not ambient O2 ASC medium. These findings demonstrate that low O2 ASC exposure resulted in reduced ECM protein and Type 2 cytokine secretions that are significant with regard to inflammation in fibrosis.<newchar>2-D<n-term>ASCs<n-term>CD40 L<n-term>CD40 ligand<n-term>COL1α1<n-term>COL1α2<n-term>DMEM<n-term>Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium<n-term>ECM<n-term>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling protein secretions and ASCs<n-term>FBS<n-term>FDR<n-term>HIF-1α<n-term>IFN-γ<n-term>IL-1β<n-term>IL-4,6,10,13<n-term>LC–MS/MS<n-term>Low oxygen culture and adipose-derived stromal/stem cell (ASC) secretome<n-term>MCP-1<n-term>PAI-1<n-term>ROC curve<n-term>SPARC/osteonectin<n-term>SVF<n-term>TGF-β1-induced protein<n-term>TNF-α<n-term>Tissue fibrosis and inflammation<n-term>WAT<n-term>adipose tissue-derived stromal/stem cells<n-term>collagen type 1α1<n-term>collagen type α2<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>false discovery rate<n-term>fetal bovine serum<n-term>hypoxia-inducible factor-1α<n-term>interferon-gamma<n-term>interleukin-1β<n-term>interleukins-4, -6, -10, and -13<n-term>liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry<n-term>monocyte chemotactic protein-1<n-term>plasminogen activator inhibitor-type 1<n-term>qRT-PCR<n-term>quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction<n-term>receiver operating characteristic curve<n-term>secreted protein acidic, cysteine-rich<n-term>serine protease inhibitors<n-term>serpins<n-term>stromal vascular fraction<n-term>tumor necrosis factor-α<n-term>two-dimensional<n-term>white adipose tissue<n-term>βig-h3<n-term><newabs>20352463<newchar>Remodeling by its very nature implied synthesis and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Although oxidative stress, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) have been implicated in vascular remodeling, the differential role of MMPs versus TIMPs and oxidative stress in vascular remodeling was unclear. TIMP-3 induced vascular cell apoptosis, therefore, we hypothesized that during vascular injury TIMP-3, MMP-9 and -12 (elastin-degrading MMP) were increased, whereas MMP-2 (constitutive MMP) and TIMP-4 (cardioprotective TIMP) decreased. Because of the potent anti-oxidant, vasorelaxing, anti-hypertensive agent, hydrogen sulfide (H2S) was used to mitigate the vascular remodeling due to the differential expression of MMP and TIMP. Carotid artery injury was created by inserting a PE-10 catheter and rotating several times before pulling out. The insertion hole was sealed. Mice were grouped: wild type (WT), wild-type damaged artery (WTD), WT+NaHS (sodium hydrogen sulfide, precursor of H2S) treatment (30 µmol/L in drinking water/6 weeks) and WTD+NaHS treatment. Carotid arteries were analyzed for oxidative stress and remodeling, by measuring super oxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), p47 (NADPH oxidase subunit), nitrotyrosine, MMPs and TIMPs by in situ immunolabeling and by Western blot analyses. The results suggested robust increase in p47, nitrotyrosine, MMP-9, MMP-12, TIMP-3 and decrease in SOD1 and MMP-2 levels in the injured arteries. The treatment with H2S ameliorated these effects. We concluded that p47, TIMP-3, MMP-9 and -12 were increased where as SOD-1, MMP-2 and TIMP-4 were decreased in the injured arteries. The treatment with H2S mitigated the vascular remodeling by normalizing the levels of redox stress, MMPs and TIMPs.<newchar><newabs>20805556<newchar>The organs of animal embryos are typically covered with an extracellular matrix (ECM) that must be carefully remodeled as these organs enlarge during post-embryonic growth; otherwise, their shape and functions may be compromised. We previously described the twisting of the Caenorhabditis elegans pharynx (here called the Twp phenotype) as a quantitative mutant phenotype that worsens as that organ enlarges during growth. Mutations previously known to cause pharyngeal twist affect membrane proteins with large extracellular domains (DIG-1 and SAX-7), as well as a C. elegans septin (UNC-61). Here we show that two novel alleles of the C. elegans papilin gene, mig-6(et4) and mig-6(sa580), can also cause the Twp phenotype. We also show that overexpression of the ADAMTS protease gene mig-17 can suppress the pharyngeal twist in mig-6 mutants and identify several alleles of other ECM-related genes that can cause or influence the Twp phenotype, including alleles of fibulin (fbl-1), perlecan (unc-52), collagens (cle-1, dpy-7), laminins (lam-1, lam-3), one ADAM protease (sup-17), and one ADAMTS protease (adt-1). The Twp phenotype in C. elegans is easily monitored using light microscopy, is quantitative via measurements of the torsion angle, and reveals that ECM components, metalloproteinases, and ECM attachment molecules are important for this organ to retain its correct shape during post-embryonic growth. The Twp phenotype is therefore a promising experimental system to study ECM remodeling and diseases.<newchar><newabs>22278925<newchar>Epithelial cells are linked by apicolateral junctions that are essential for tissue integrity. Epithelial cells also secrete a specialized apical extracellular matrix (ECM) that serves as a protective barrier. Some components of the apical ECM, such as mucins, can influence epithelial junction remodeling and disassembly during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the molecular composition and biological roles of the apical ECM are not well understood. We identified a set of extracellular leucine-rich repeat only (eLRRon) proteins in C. elegans (LET-4 and EGG-6) that are expressed on the apical surfaces of epidermal cells and some tubular epithelia, including the excretory duct and pore. A previously characterized paralog, SYM-1, is also expressed in epidermal cells and secreted into the apical ECM. Related mammalian eLRRon proteins, such as decorin or LRRTM1-3, influence stromal ECM or synaptic junction organization, respectively. Mutants lacking one or more of the C. elegans epithelial eLRRon proteins show multiple defects in apical ECM organization, consistent with these proteins contributing to the embryonic sheath and cuticular ECM. Furthermore, epithelial junctions initially form in the correct locations, but then rupture at the time of cuticle secretion and remodeling of cell-matrix interactions. This work identifies epithelial eLRRon proteins as important components and organizers of the pre-cuticular and cuticular apical ECM, and adds to the small but growing body of evidence linking the apical ECM to epithelial junction stability. We propose that eLRRon-dependent apical ECM organization contributes to cell-cell adhesion and may modulate epithelial junction dynamics in both normal and disease situations.<newchar><newabs>26247678<newchar>Hyaluronan (HA) in the ocular trabecular meshwork (TM) is a critical modulator of aqueous humor outflow. Individual HA strands in the pericellular matrix can coalesce to form cable-like structures, which have different functional properties. Here, we investigated HA structural configuration by TM cells in response to various stimuli known to stimulate extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In addition, the effects of HA cable induction on aqueous outflow resistance was determined. Primary TM cell cultures grown on tissue culture-treated plastic were treated for 12-48 h with TNFα, IL-1α, or TGFβ2. TM cells grown on silicone membranes were subject to mechanical stretch, which induces synthesis and activation of ECM proteolytic enzymes. HA structural configuration was investigated by HA binding protein (HAbp) staining and confocal microscopy. HAbp-labeled cables were induced by TNFα, TGFβ2 and mechanical stretch, but not by IL-1α. HA synthase (HAS) gene expression was quantitated by quantitative RT-PCR and HA concentration was measured by ELISA assay. By quantitative RT-PCR, HAS-1, -2, and -3 genes were differentially up-regulated and showed temporal differences in response to each treatment. HA concentration was increased in the media by TNFα, TGFβ2 and IL-1α, but mechanical stretch decreased pericellular HA concentrations. Immunofluorescence and Western immunoblotting were used to investigate the distribution and protein levels of the HA-binding proteins, tumor necrosis factor-stimulated gene-6 (TSG-6) and inter-α-inhibitor (IαI). Western immunoblotting showed that TSG-6 and IαI were increased by TNFα, TGFβ2 and IL-1α, but mechanical stretch reduced their levels. The underlying substrate appears to affect the identity of IαI·TSG-6·HA complexes since different complexes were detected when TM cells were grown on a silicone substrate compared to a rigid plastic surface. Porcine anterior segments were perfused with 10 μg/ml polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (polyI:C), a potent inducer of HA cables, and outflow rates were monitored for 72 h. PolyI:C had no significant effect on outflow resistance in porcine anterior segments perfused at physiological pressure. Collectively, HAS gene expression, HA concentration and configuration are differentially modified in response to several treatments that induce ECM remodeling in TM cells. In ocular TM cells, our data suggests that the most important determinant of HA cable formation appears to be the ratio of HA chains produced by the different HAS genes. However, the act of rearranging pericellular HA into cable-like structures does not appear to influence aqueous outflow resistance.<newchar>Aqueous outflow<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Glaucoma<n-term>Hyaluronan<n-term>Trabecular meshwork<n-term><newabs>26288845<newchar>Chronic fibro-proliferative diseases are associated with nearly 45% of all deaths in the developed world. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) mediated remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in disease development. Degradation of type I collagen is considered having a major role in this matter. C1M is a biomarker measuring type I collagen degradation fragments in blood. The aim of the current study was to investigate whether MMP mediated type I collagen degradation (C1M) was predictive of mortality in a large prospective cohort of Danish women aged 48-89 (n = 5855). Subjects with high serum C1M showed significant increased mortality. The adjusted three year HR was 2.02 [95% CI: 1.48-2.76] for all-cause mortality, 2.32 [95% CI: 1.51-3.56] for cancer and 1.77 [95% CI: 0.98-3.17] for cardiovascular diseases. The adjusted nine year HR was 1.50 [95% CI: 1.28-1.75] for all-cause mortality, 1.49 [95% CI: 1.16-1.90] for cancer and 1.69 [95% CI: 1.27-2.24] for cardiovascular diseases. High MMP-mediated type I collagen degradation was associated with increased mortality. Subjects with high C1M had a 2-fold increase in mortality compared to subjects with low levels of this collagen degradation product.<newchar>C1M, MMP-mediated type I collagen degradation<n-term>CTX-I, Cathepsin K degraded products of C-terminal telopeptides of type I collagen<n-term>Clinical<n-term>ECM, Extracellular matrix<n-term>Extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>MMP<n-term>MMP, Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>Mortality<n-term>PERF I, Prospective Epidemiological Risk Factor study<n-term>PTM, Post-translational modification<n-term>Protease activity<n-term>Type I collagen<n-term><newabs>24759560<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is not only involved in the maintenance of normal physiological tissue but also in interactions with other ECM components, tissue remodeling, and modulating immune responses. The skin provides a distinctive environment characterized by rich fibroblasts producing various ECM proteins, epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, and immune responses induced by external stimuli. Recently, periostin-a matricellular protein-has been highlighted for its pivotal functions in the skin. Analysis of periostin null mice has revealed that periostin contributes to collagen fibrillogenesis, collagen cross-linking, and the formation of ECM meshwork via interactions with other ECM components. Periostin expression is enhanced by mechanical stress or skin injury; this is indicative of the physiologically protective functions of periostin, which promotes wound repair by acting on keratinocytes and fibroblasts. Along with its physiological functions, periostin plays pathogenic roles in skin fibrosis and chronic allergic inflammation. In systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients, periostin levels reflect the severity of skin fibrosis. Periostin null mice have shown reduced skin fibrosis in a bleomycin-induced SSc mouse model, indicating a key role of periostin in fibrosis. Moreover, in atopic dermatitis (AD), attenuated AD phenotype has been observed in periostin null mice in a house dust mite extract-induced AD mouse model. Th2 cytokine-induced periostin acts on keratinocytes to produce inflammatory cytokines that further enhance the Th2 response, thereby sustaining and amplifying chronic allergic inflammation. Thus, periostin is deeply involved in the pathogenesis of AD and other inflammation-related disorders affecting the skin. Understanding the dynamic actions of periostin would be key to dissecting pathogenesis of skin-related diseases and to developing novel therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>26432841<newchar>The mammalian circadian clock consists of multiple transcriptional regulators that coordinate biological processes in a time-of-day-dependent manner. Cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of the circadian clock component, Bmal1 (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein 1), leads to age-dependent dilated cardiomyopathy and decreased lifespan in mice. We investigated whether cardiomyocyte-specific Bmal1 knockout (CBK) mice display early alterations in cardiac diastolic function, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, and inflammation modulators by investigating CBK mice and littermate controls at 8 and 28 wk of age (i.e., prior to overt systolic dysfunction). Left ventricles of CBK mice exhibited (P &lt; 0.05): 1) progressive abnormal diastolic septal annular wall motion and reduced pulmonary venous flow only at 28 wk of age; 2) progressive worsening of fibrosis in the interstitial and endocardial regions from 8 to 28 wk of age; 3) increased (&gt;1.5 fold) expression of collagen I and III, as well as the matrix metalloproteinases MMP-9, MMP-13, and MMP-14 at 28 wk of age; 4) increased transcript levels of neutrophil chemotaxis and leukocyte migration genes (Ccl2, Ccl8, Cxcl2, Cxcl1, Cxcr2, Il1β) with no change in Il-10 and Il-13 genes expression; and 5) decreased levels of 5-LOX, HO-1 and COX-2, enzymes indicating impaired resolution of inflammation. In conclusion, genetic disruption of the cardiomyocyte circadian clock results in diastolic dysfunction, adverse ECM remodeling, and proinflammatory gene expression profiles in the mouse heart, indicating signs of early cardiac aging in CBK mice.<newchar>Bmal1<n-term>aging<n-term>circadian clock<n-term>diastolic dysfunction<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>inflammation<n-term><newabs>25083735<newchar>Tissue integrity in the face of external physical forces requires the production of a strong extracellular matrix (ECM) composed primarily of the protein collagen. Tendons and the heart both withstand large and changing physical forces, and emerging evidence suggests that the transcription factor scleraxis plays a central role in responding to these forces by directly regulating the production of ECM components and (or) by determining the fate of matrix-producing cell types. Thus, despite the highly disparate inherent nature of these tissues, a common response mechanism may exist to govern the development, growth, and remodeling of the ECM in response to external force.<newchar>ECM<n-term>cardiac valves<n-term>collagen<n-term>collagène<n-term>expression génique<n-term>facteur de transcription<n-term>force<n-term>gene expression<n-term>matrice extracellulaire<n-term>tendon<n-term>transcription factor<n-term>valves cardiaques<n-term><newabs>26892540<newchar>The biological processes of cancer cells such as tumorigenesis, proliferation, angiogenesis, apoptosis and invasion are greatly influenced by the surrounding microenvironment. The ability of solid malignant tumors to alter the microenvironment represents an important characteristic through which tumor cells are able to acquire specific functions necessary for their malignant biological behaviors. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases with the capacity of remodeling extracellular matrix (ECM) by degrading almost all ECM proteins, which plays essential roles during the invasion and metastasis process of solid malignant tumors, including allowing tumor cells to modify the ECM components and release cytokines, ultimately facilitating protease-dependent tumor progression. MMP-11, also named stromelysin-3, is a member of the stromelysin subgroup belonging to MMPs superfamily, which has been detected in cancer cells, stromal cells and adjacent microenvironment. Differently, MMP-11 exerts a dual effect on tumors. On the one hand MMP-11 promotes cancer development by inhibiting apoptosis as well as enhancing migration and invasion of cancer cells, on the other hand MMP-11 plays a negative role against cancer development via suppressing metastasis in animal models. Overexpression of MMP-11 was discovered in sera of cancer patients compared with normal control group as well as in multiple tumor tissue specimens, such as gastric cancer, breast cancer, and pancreatic cancer. At present, some evidence supports that MMP-11 may work as a significant tumor biomarker for early detection of cancer, tumor staging, prognostic analysis, monitoring recurrence during follow-up and also a potential target for immunotherapy against cancer. In view of the importance of MMP-11 in modifying tumor microenvironment and potent antitumoral effects on solid tumors, there is an urgent need for a deeper understanding of how MMP-11 modulates tumor progression, and exploring its potential clinical application.<newchar><newabs>24012743<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is known to regulate important processes in neuronal cell development, activity and growth. It is associated with the structural stabilization of neuronal processes and synaptic contacts during the maturation of the central nervous system. The remodeling of the ECM during both development and after central nervous system injury has been shown to affect neuronal guidance, synaptic plasticity and their regenerative responses. Particular interest has focused on the inhibitory role of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) and their formation into dense lattice-like structures, termed perineuronal nets (PNNs), which enwrap sub-populations of neurons and restrict plasticity. Recent studies in mammalian systems have implicated CSPGs and PNNs in regulating and restricting structural plasticity. The enzymatic degradation of CSPGs or destabilization of PNNs has been shown to enhance neuronal activity and plasticity after central nervous system injury. This review focuses on the role of the ECM, CSPGs and PNNs; and how developmental and pharmacological manipulation of these structures have enhanced neuronal plasticity and aided functional recovery in regeneration, stroke, and amblyopia. In addition to CSPGs, this review also points to the functions and potential therapeutic value of these and several other key ECM molecules in epileptogenesis and dementia.<newchar>AD<n-term>ADDLs<n-term>Alzheimer’s disease<n-term>BDNF<n-term>CSPGs<n-term>ChABC<n-term>ECM<n-term>GAG<n-term>HSPGs<n-term>LGI1<n-term>LRP1<n-term>LTD<n-term>LTP<n-term>MMP<n-term>OPCs<n-term>Otx2<n-term>PNNs<n-term>PV<n-term>SCI<n-term>SRPX2<n-term>Sushi-repeat Protein, X-linked 2<n-term>amyloid-derived diffusible ligands<n-term>brain-derived neurotrophic factor<n-term>chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans<n-term>chondroitinase ABC<n-term>epilepsy<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glycosaminoglycan<n-term>heparan sulfate proteoglycans<n-term>leucine-rich, glioma-inactivated 1<n-term>lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1<n-term>long-term depression<n-term>long-term potentiation<n-term>mEPSCs<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents<n-term>oligodendrocyte precursor cells<n-term>orthodenticle homeobox protein 2<n-term>parvalbumin<n-term>perineuronal nets<n-term>plasticity<n-term>proteoglycans<n-term>spinal cord injury<n-term>uPA<n-term>urokinase-type plasminogen activator<n-term><newabs>26910848<newchar>Type V collagen (COLV) is a regulatory fibril-forming collagen. It has at least three different molecular isoforms-α1(V)2 α2(V), α1(V)3, and α1(V)α2(V)α3(V)-formed by combinations of three different polypeptide α chains-α1(V), α2(V), and α3(V). COL V is a relatively minor collagen of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Morphologically, COLV occurs as heterotypic fibrils with type I collagen (COLI), microfilaments, or 12-nm-thick fibrils. COLV is synthesized in various mesenchymal cells and its gene expression is modulated by TGF-β and growth factors. While resistant to digestion by interstitial collagenases, native and denatured COLV are degraded by metalloproteinases and gelatinases, thereby promoting ECM remodeling. COLV interacts with matrix collagens and structural proteins, conferring structural integrity to tissue scaffolds. It binds matrix macromolecules, modulating cellular behavior, and functions. COLV co-assembles with COLI into heterotypic fibrils in the cornea and skin dermis, acting as a dominant regulator of collagen fibrillogenesis. COLV deficiency is associated with loss of corneal transparency and classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, while COLV overexpression is found in cancer, granulation tissue, inflammation, atherosclerosis, and fibrosis of lungs, skin, kidneys, adipose tissue, and liver. COLV isoform containing the α3(V) chain is involved in mediating pancreatic islet cell functions. In the liver, COLV is a minor but regular component of the ECM. Increases in COLV are associated with both early and advanced hepatic fibrosis. The neoepitopes of COLV have been shown to be a useful noninvasive serum biomarker for assessing fibrotic progression and resolution in experimental hepatic fibrosis. COLV is multifunctional in health, disease, and fibrosis. Anat Rec, 299:613-629, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.<newchar>collagen V deficiency and overexpression<n-term>collagen V in disease and fibrosis<n-term>collagen V neoepitopes<n-term>collagen V synthesis and degradation<n-term>hepatic fibrosis biomarker<n-term><newabs>21287182<newchar>Lung tissue remodeling in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) involves diverse processes characterized by epithelial disruption, smooth muscle hypertrophy/hyperplasia, airway wall fibrosis, and alveolar destruction. According to the accepted current theory of COPD pathogenesis, tissue remodeling in COPD is predominantly a consequence of an imbalance between proteolytic and antiproteolytic activities. However, most of the studies carried out during the last few years have focused on mechanisms related to degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) structural proteins, neglecting those involved in ECM protein deposition. This review revisits some of the latest findings related to fibrotic changes that occur in the airway wall of COPD patients, as well as the main cellular phenotypes relevant to these processes.<newchar><newabs>22584609<newchar>The large, elastic arteries, as their name suggests, provide elastic distention and recoil during the cardiac cycle in vertebrate animals. The arteries are distended from the pressure of ejecting blood during the active contraction of the left ventricle (LV) during systole and recoil to their original dimensions during relaxation of the LV during diastole. The cyclic distension occurs with minimal energy loss, due to the elastic properties of one of the major structural extracellular matrix (ECM) components, elastin. The maximum distension is limited to prevent damage to the artery by another major ECM component, collagen. The mix of ECM components in the wall largely determines the passive mechanical behavior of the arteries and the subsequent load on the heart during systole. While much research has focused on initial artery formation, there has been less attention on the continuing development of the artery to produce the mature composite wall complete with endothelial cells (ECs), smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and the necessary mix of ECM components for proper cardiovascular function. This review focuses on the physiology of large artery development, including SMC differentiation and ECM production. The effects of hemodynamic forces and ECM deposition on the evolving arterial structure and function are discussed. Human diseases and mouse models with genetic mutations in ECM proteins that affect large artery development are summarized. A review of constitutive models and growth and remodeling theories is presented, along with future directions to improve understanding of ECM and the mechanics of large artery development.<newchar><newabs>26078421<newchar>Peripheral blood (PB) is known as a source of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), as is bone marrow (BM), and is acquired easily. However, it is difficult to have enough MSCs, and their osteogenic capacity with dental implantations is scarce. Therefore, we characterized peripheral blood mesenchymal stem cells (PBMSCs) cultured on a bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell (BMMSC) natural extracellular matrix (ECM) and demonstrated the osteogenic capability in an experimental chamber implant surgery model in rabbits. We isolated PBMSCs from rabbits by culturing on a natural ECM-coated plate during primary culture. We characterized the PBMSCs using a fluorescence-activated cell scanner, cell proliferation assay, and multiple differentiation assay and compared them with BMMSCs. We also analyzed the osteogenic potential of PBMSCs mixed with hydroxyapatite/tricalcium phosphate (HA/TCP) by transplanting them into immunocompromised mice. Then, the mixture was applied to the canals. After 3 and 6 wk, we analyzed new bone (NB) formation inside the chambers using histological and histomorphometric analyses. The PBMSCs had a similar rate of BrdU-positive cells to BMMSCs, positively expressing CD90 but negative for CD14. The PBMSCs also showed osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic ability in vitro and osteogenic ability in vivo. Histological and histomorphometric results illustrated that the PBMSC and BMMSC groups showed higher NB than the HA/TCP and defect groups in the upper and lower chambers at 6 wk and in the upper canal at 3 wk; however, there was no difference in NB among all groups in the lower canal at 3 wk. The PBMSCs have characteristics and bone regeneration ability similar to BMMSCs both in vitro and in vivo. ECM was effective for obtaining PBMSCs. Therefore, PBMSCs are a promising source for bone regeneration for clinical use.<newchar>bone marrow stromal cells<n-term>bone remodeling<n-term>dental implantation<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>mesenchymal stem cell<n-term>peripheral blood<n-term><newabs>17332884<newchar>Hypertensive heart disease (HHD) occurs in patients that clinically have both diastolic and systolic heart failure and will soon become the most common cause of heart failure. Two key aspects of heart failure secondary to HHD are the relatively highly prevalent LV hypertrophy and cardiac fibrosis, caused by changes in the local and systemic neurohormonal environment. The fibrotic state is marked by changes in the balance between MMPs and their inhibitors, which alter the composition of the ECM. Importantly, the fibrotic ECM impairs cardiomyocyte function. Recent research suggests that therapies targeting the expression, synthesis, or activation of the enzymes responsible for ECM homeostasis might represent novel opportunities to modify the natural progression of HHD.<newchar><newabs>22521401<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) has long been viewed primarily as an organized network of solid-phase ligands for integrin receptors. During degenerative processes, such as osteoarthritis, the ECM undergoes deterioration, resulting in its remodeling and in the release of some of its components. Matrilin-3 (MATN3) is an almost cartilage specific, pericellular protein acting in the assembly of the ECM of chondrocytes. In the past, MATN3 was found required for cartilage homeostasis, but also involved in osteoarthritis-related pro-catabolic functions. Here, to better understand the pathological and physiological functions of MATN3, its concentration as a circulating protein in articular fluids of human osteoarthritic patients was determined and its functions as a recombinant protein produced in human cells were investigated with particular emphasis on the physical state under which it is presented to chondrocytes. MATN3 down-regulated cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and up-regulated catabolism when administered as a soluble protein. When artificially immobilized, however, MATN3 induced chondrocyte adhesion via a α5β1 integrin-dependent mechanism, AKT activation and favored survival and ECM synthesis. Furthermore, MATN3 bound directly to isolated α5β1 integrin in vitro. TGFβ1 stimulation of chondrocytes allowed integration of exogenous MATN3 into their ECM and ECM-integrated MATN3 induced AKT phosphorylation and improved ECM synthesis and accumulation. In conclusion, the integration of MATN3 to the pericellular matrix of chondrocytes critically determines the direction toward which MATN3 regulates cartilage metabolism. These data explain how MATN3 plays either beneficial or detrimental functions in cartilage and highlight the important role played by the physical state of ECM molecules.<newchar><newabs>21257918<newchar>Cell-to-cell adhesions are crucial in maintaining the structural and functional integrity of cardiac cells. Little is known about the mechanosensitivity and mechanotransduction of cell-to-cell interactions. Most studies of cardiac mechanotransduction and myofibrillogenesis have focused on cell-extracellular matrix (ECM)-specific interactions. This study assesses the direct role of intercellular adhesion, specifically that of N-cadherin-mediated mechanotransduction, on the morphology and internal organization of neonatal ventricular cardiac myocytes. The results show that cadherin-mediated cell attachments are capable of eliciting a cytoskeletal network response similar to that of integrin-mediated force response and transmission, affecting myofibrillar organization, myocyte shape, and cortical stiffness. Traction forces mediated by N-cadherin were shown to be comparable to those sustained by ECM. The directional changes in predicted traction forces as a function of imposed loads (gel stiffness) provide the added evidence that N-cadherin is a mechanoresponsive adhesion receptor. Strikingly, the mechanical sensitivity response (gain) in terms of the measured cell-spread area as a function of imposed load (adhesive substrate rigidity) was consistently higher for N-cadherin-coated surfaces compared with ECM protein-coated surfaces. In addition, the cytoskeletal architecture of myocytes on an N-cadherin adhesive microenvironment was characteristically different from that on an ECM environment, suggesting that the two mechanotransductive cell adhesion systems may play both independent and complementary roles in myocyte cytoskeletal spatial organization. These results indicate that cell-to-cell-mediated force perception and transmission are involved in the organization and development of cardiac structure and function.<newchar><newabs>23262216<newchar>The components that comprise the extracellular matrix (ECM) are integral to normal tissue homeostasis as well as the development and progression of breast tumors. The secretion, construction, and remodeling of the ECM are each regulated by a complex interplay between tumor cells, fibroblasts and macrophages. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) is an essential molecule in regulating the cellular production of ECM molecules and the adhesive interactions of cells with the ECM. Additionally, hypoxic cell signals, initiated by oxygen deprivation, additional metabolic factors or receptor activation, are associated with ECM formation and the progression of breast cancer. Both TGF-β and hypoxic cell signals are implicated in the functional and morphological changes of cancer-associated-fibroblasts and tumor-associated-macrophages. Moreover, the enhanced recruitment of tumor and stromal cells in response to hypoxia-induced chemokines leads to increased ECM deposition and remodeling, increased blood vessel formation, and enhanced tumor migration. Thus, elucidation of the collaborative networks between tumor and stromal cells in response to the combined signals of TGF-β and hypoxia may yield insight into treatment parameters that target both tumor and stromal cells.<newchar><newabs>23124941<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a living network of proteins that maintains the structural integrity of the myocardium and allows the transmission of electrical and mechanical forces between the myocytes for systole and diastole. During ventricular remodeling, as a result of iterations in the hemodynamic workload, collagen, the main component of the ECM, increases and occupies the areas between the myocytes and the vessels. The resultant fibrosis (reparative fibrosis) is initially a compensatory mechanism and may progress adversely influencing tissue stiffness and ventricular function. Replacement fibrosis appears at sites of previous cardiomyocyte necrosis to preserve the structural integrity of the myocardium, but with the subsequent formation of scar tissue and widespread distribution, it has adverse functional consequences. Continued accumulation of collagen impairs diastolic function and compromises systolic mechanics. Nevertheless, the development of fibrosis is a dynamic process wherein myofibroblasts, the principal cellular elements of fibrosis, are not only metabolically active and capable of the production and upregulation of cytokines but also have contractile properties. During the process of reverse remodeling with left ventricular assist device unloading, cellular, structural, and functional improvements are observed in terminal heart failure patients. With the advent of anti-fibrotic pharmacologic therapies, cellular therapy, and ventricular support devices, fibrosis has become an important therapeutic target in heart failure patients. Herein, we review the current concepts of fibrosis as a main component of ventricular remodeling in heart failure patients. Our aim is to integrate the histopathologic process of fibrosis with the neurohormonal, cytochemical, and molecular changes that lead to ventricular remodeling and its physiologic consequences in patients. The concept of fibrosis as living scar allows us to envision targeting this scar as a means of improving ventricular function in heart failure patients.<newchar><newabs>24529431<newchar>Peri-adipocyte extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a key biological process observed during adipose tissue development and expansion. The genetic loss of a pericellular collagenase, MMP14 (also known as MT1-MMP), renders mice lipodystrophic with the accumulation of undigested collagen fibers in adipose tissues. MMP14 is not necessary for adipocyte differentiation (adipogenesis) per se under a conventional two-dimensional (2-D) culture condition; however, MMP14 plays a critical role in adipogenesis in vivo. The role of MMP14 in adipogenesis and adipocyte gene expression was uncovered in vitro only when tested within a three-dimensional (3-D) collagen gel, which recapitulated the in vivo ECM-rich environment. Studying adipogenesis in 3-D may serve as an effective experimental approach to bridge gaps in our understanding of in vivo adipocyte biology. Moreover, by assessing the content of collagen family members and their rate of degradation in adipose tissues, we should be able to better define the role of dynamic ECM remodeling in the pathogenesis of obesity and diabetes.<newchar>3-D adipogenesis<n-term>Adipocytes<n-term>Adipose tissue biology<n-term>Collagen<n-term>ECM<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>MMP<n-term>Obesity<n-term><newabs>27035343<newchar>The time-course of the pathological effects induced by the venom of the snake Bothrops asper in muscle tissue was investigated by a combination of histology, proteomic analysis of exudates collected in the vicinity of damaged muscle, and immunodetection of extracellular matrix proteins in exudates. Proteomic assay of exudates has become an excellent new methodological tool to detect key biomarkers of tissue alterations for a more integrative perspective of snake venom-induced pathology. The time-course analysis of the intracellular proteins showed an early presence of cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins in exudates, while cytoskeletal proteins increased later on. This underscores the rapid cytotoxic effect of venom, especially in muscle fibers, due to the action of myotoxic phospholipases A2, followed by the action of proteinases in the cytoskeleton of damaged muscle fibers. Similarly, the early presence of basement membrane (BM) and other extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in exudates reflects the rapid microvascular damage and hemorrhage induced by snake venom metalloproteinases. The presence of fragments of type IV collagen and perlecan one hour after envenoming suggests that hydrolysis of these mechanically/structurally-relevant BM components plays a key role in the genesis of hemorrhage. On the other hand, the increment of some ECM proteins in the exudate at later time intervals is likely a consequence of the action of endogenous matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) or of de novo synthesis of ECM proteins during tissue remodeling as part of the inflammatory reaction. Our results offer relevant insights for a more integrative and systematic understanding of the time-course dynamics of muscle tissue damage induced by B. asper venom and possibly other viperid venoms.<newchar><newabs>25601362<newchar>Perineuronal nets (PNNs) were shown to be markedly altered in subjects with schizophrenia. In particular, decreases of PNNs have been detected in the amygdala, entorhinal cortex and prefrontal cortex. The formation of these specialized extracellular matrix (ECM) aggregates during postnatal development, their functions, and association with distinct populations of GABAergic interneurons, bear great relevance to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. PNNs gradually mature in an experience-dependent manner during late stages of postnatal development, overlapping with the prodromal period/age of onset of schizophrenia. Throughout adulthood, PNNs regulate neuronal properties, including synaptic remodeling, cell membrane compartmentalization and subsequent regulation of glutamate receptors and calcium channels, and susceptibility to oxidative stress. With the present paper, we discuss evidence for PNN abnormalities in schizophrenia, the potential functional impact of such abnormalities on inhibitory circuits and, in turn, cognitive and emotion processing. We integrate these considerations with results from recent genetic studies showing genetic susceptibility for schizophrenia associated with genes encoding for PNN components, matrix-regulating molecules and immune system factors. Notably, the composition of PNNs is regulated dynamically in response to factors such as fear, reward, stress, and immune response. This regulation occurs through families of matrix metalloproteinases that cleave ECM components, altering their functions and affecting plasticity. Several metalloproteinases have been proposed as vulnerability factors for schizophrenia. We speculate that the physiological process of PNN remodeling may be disrupted in schizophrenia as a result of interactions between matrix remodeling processes and immune system dysregulation. In turn, these mechanisms may contribute to the dysfunction of GABAergic neurons.<newchar>Amygdala<n-term>Entorhinal cortex<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Perineuronal nets<n-term>Prefrontal cortex<n-term>Schizophrenia<n-term><newabs>26686051<newchar>Corneal injuries remain a major cause of consultation in the ophthalmology clinics worldwide. Repair of corneal wounds is a complex mechanism that involves cell death, migration, proliferation, differentiation, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In the present study, we used a tissue-engineered, two-layers (epithelium and stroma) human cornea as a biomaterial to study both the cellular and molecular mechanisms of wound healing. Gene profiling on microarrays revealed important alterations in the pattern of genes expressed by tissue-engineered corneas in response to wound healing. Expression of many MMPs-encoding genes was shown by microarray and qPCR analyses to increase in the migrating epithelium of wounded corneas. Many of these enzymes were converted into their enzymatically active form as wound closure proceeded. In addition, expression of MMPs by human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) was affected both by the stromal fibroblasts and the collagen-enriched ECM they produce. Most of all, results from mass spectrometry analyses provided evidence that a fully stratified epithelium is required for proper synthesis and organization of the ECM on which the epithelial cells adhere. In conclusion, and because of the many characteristics it shares with the native cornea, this human two layers corneal substitute may prove particularly useful to decipher the mechanistic details of corneal wound healing.<newchar>Biomaterial<n-term>Cornea<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Gene expression<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>Tissue-engineering<n-term>Wound healing<n-term><newabs>26676222<newchar>The plasminogen activator (PA) system consists of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), urokinase-type plasminogen activator and its receptor (uPA and uPAR). PAI-1 inhibits the activation of uPA (which converts plasminogen to plasmin), and is involved in cancer invasion and metastasis, by remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) through regulating plasmin. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small subset of cells within tumors, and are thought to be involved in tumor recurrence and metastasis. Considering these facts, we investigated the relationship between PAI-1 and cervical CSCs. We used ALDH1 as a marker of cervical CSCs. First, we demonstrated that culturing ALDH1-high cells and ALDH-low cells on collagen IV-coted plates increased their expression of active PAI-1 (ELISA), and these increases were suggested to be at mRNA expression levels (RT-qPCR). Secondly, we demonstrated PAI-1 was indeed involved in the ECM maintenance. With gelatin zymography assays, we found that ALDH1-high cells and ALDH-low cells expressed pro-matrix metalloproteinase-2 (pro-MMP-2) irrespective of their coatings. With gelatinase/collagenase assay kit, we confirmed that collagenase activity was increased when ALDH1-low cells were exposed to TM5275, a small molecule inhibitor of PAI-1. Putting the data together, we hypothesized that cancer cells adhered to basal membrane secrete abundant PAI-1, on the other hand, cancer cells (especially CSCs rather than non-CSCs) distant from basal membrane secrete less PAI-1, which makes the ECM surrounding CSCs more susceptible to degradation. Our study could be an explanation of conflicting reports, where some researchers found negative impacts of PAI-1 expression on clinical outcomes and others not, by considering the concept of CSCs.<newchar><newabs>21692191<newchar>Growth and guidance of developing or regenerating axons require sensing of environmental cues (EC) by the growth cone. To explore the role of a spatially defined distribution of ligands on guidance, extension, and branching, we used a microcontact-printing technique allowing to deposit ligands as discrete spots of a size smaller than a cell body. Micropatterned substrates (MS) were created with varying distance between spots and two different ligands (laminin (LN) and fibronectin (FN)). Dissociated dorsal root ganglion neurons were seeded on either monocomponent MS made from LN or FN alone, or multicomponent MS made from alternating lines of LN and FN spots. On monocomponent MS the high-affinity ligand LN not only stimulated neurite extension, but also provided guidance and branching control, associated with marked cytoskeleton remodeling. The latter was assessed by evaluating the increase in rigidity of the distal neurite segment by Atomic Force Microscopy. In contrast, FN alone acts as a low-affinity ligand which dramatically limits neurite outgrowth. Surprisingly, observation of growth cone dynamics on multicomponent MS revealed that FN constitute a transient support for neurite progression, facilitating exploration of other EC present within a certain distance. Such a mutual contribution of high and low affinity ligands to neurite outgrowth is consistent with a recent theory of force regulation of dynamic adhesion sites showing cell's sensitivity to EC properties would actually depend on the rate of change of the reacting force, the latter controlling the otherwise instantaneous chemical binding process.<newchar><newabs>27105779<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during physiological processes is mediated by invasive protrusions called podosomes. Positioning and dynamics of podosomes define the extent of ECM degradation. Microtubules are known to be involved in podosome regulation, but the role of microtubule (MT) network configuration in podosome dynamics and positioning is not well understood. Here, we show that the arrangement of the microtubule network defines the pattern of podosome formation and relocation in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). We show that microtubule plus-end targeting facilitates de novo formation of podosomes, in addition to podosome remodeling. Moreover, specialized bent microtubules with plus ends reversed towards the cell center promote relocation of podosomes from the cell edge to the cell center, resulting in an evenly distributed podosome pattern. Microtubule bending is induced downstream of protein kinase C (PKC) activation and requires microtubule-stabilizing proteins known as cytoplasmic linker associated proteins (CLASPs) and retrograde actin flow. Similar to microtubule depolymerization, CLASP depletion by siRNA blocks microtubule bending and eliminates centripetal relocation of podosomes. Podosome relocation also coincides with translocation of podosome-stimulating kinesin KIF1C, which is known to move preferentially along CLASP-associated microtubules. These findings indicate that CLASP-dependent microtubule network configuration is critical to the cellular location and distribution of KIF1C-dependent podosomes. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.<newchar>CLASP<n-term>KIF1C<n-term>microtubules<n-term>podosome<n-term><newabs>25999715<newchar>Islet transplantation is considered to be a curative treatment for type 1 diabetes mellitus. However, disruption of the extracellular matrix (ECM) leads to β-cell destruction and graft dysfunction. In this study, we developed a functionalized self-assembling peptide, KLD-F, with ECM mimic motifs derived from fibronectin and collagen IV, and evaluated its effect on β-cell function and proliferation. Atomic force microscopy and rheological results showed that KLD-F could self-assemble into a nanofibrous scaffold and change into a hydrogel in physiological saline condition. In a three-dimensional cell culture model, KLD-F improved ECM remodeling and cell-cell adhesion of INS-1 β-cells by upregulation of E-cadherin, fibronectin, and collagen IV. KLD-F also enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and expression of β-cell function genes, including Glut2, Ins1, MafA, and Pdx-1 in INS-1 cells. Moreover, KLD-F promoted proliferation of INS-1 β-cells and upregulated Ki67 expression by mediating cell cycle progression. In addition, KLD-F improved β-cell function and proliferation via an integrin/focal adhesion kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase/cyclin D pathway. This study highlights the fact that the β-cell-ECM interaction reestablished with this functionalized self-assembling peptide is a promising method to improve the therapeutic efficacy of islet transplantation.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>insulin secretion<n-term>islet transplantation<n-term>self-assembling peptide<n-term>β-cell proliferation<n-term><newabs>21575987<newchar>Cells are strongly influenced by the local structure and mechanics of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We recently showed that adding agarose to soft collagen ECMs can mechanically stiffen these hydrogels by two orders of magnitude while limiting 3D cell motility, which we speculated might derive from agarose-mediated inhibition of collagen fiber deformation and remodeling. Here, we directly address this hypothesis by investigating the effects of agarose on cell-collagen interactions at the microscale. Addition of agarose progressively restricts cell spreading, reduces stress fiber and focal adhesion assembly, and inhibits macroscopic gel compaction. While time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry and scanning electron microscopy fail to reveal agarose-induced alterations in collagen ligand presentation, the latter modality shows that agarose strongly impairs cell-directed assembly of large collagen bundles. Agarose-mediated inhibition of cell spreading and cytoarchitecture can be rescued by β-agarase digestion or by covalently crosslinking the matrix with glutaraldehyde. Based on these results, we argue that cell spreading and motility on collagen requires local matrix stiffening, which can be achieved via cell-mediated fiber remodeling or by chemically crosslinking the fibers. These findings provide new mechanistic insights into the regulatory function of agarose and bear general implications for cell adhesion and motility in fibrous ECMs.<newchar><newabs>20513443<newchar>Organ size typically increases dramatically during juvenile growth. This growth presents a fundamental tension, as organs need resiliency to resist stresses while still maintaining plasticity to accommodate growth. The extracellular matrix (ECM) is central to providing resiliency, but how ECM is remodeled to accommodate growth is poorly understood. We investigated remodeling of Drosophila respiratory tubes (tracheae) that elongate continually during larval growth, despite being lined with a rigid cuticular ECM. Cuticle is initially deposited with a characteristic pattern of repeating ridges and valleys known as taenidia. We find that for tubes to elongate, the extracellular protease Mmp1 is required for expansion of ECM between the taenidial ridges during each intermolt period. Mmp1 protein localizes in periodically spaced puncta that are in register with the taenidial spacing. Mmp1 also degrades old cuticle at molts, promotes apical membrane expansion in larval tracheae, and promotes tube elongation in embryonic tracheae. Whereas work in other developmental systems has demonstrated that MMPs are required for axial elongation occurring in localized growth zones, this study demonstrates that MMPs can also mediate interstitial matrix remodeling during growth of an organ system.<newchar><newabs>22926488<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides structural support by serving as a scaffold for cells, and as such the ECM maintains normal tissue homeostasis and mediates the repair response following injury. In response to myocardial infarction (MI), ECM expression is generally upregulated in the left ventricle (LV), which regulates LV remodeling by modulating scar formation. The ECM directly affects scar formation by regulating growth factor release and cell adhesion and indirectly affects scar formation by regulating the inflammatory, angiogenic, and fibroblast responses. This review summarizes the current literature on ECM expression patterns and fibroblast mechanisms in the myocardium, focusing on the ECM response to MI. In addition, we discuss future research areas that are needed to better understand the molecular mechanisms of ECM action, both in general and as a means to optimize infarct healing.<newchar><newabs>21554191<newchar>Tissue-engineered heart valves are prone to early structural deterioration. We hypothesize that cell-scaffold interaction and mechanical deformation results in upregulation of genes related to osteogenic/chondrogenic differentiation and thus changes extracellular matrix (ECM) composition in human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (hBMSC)-derived tissue-engineered grafts. hBMSC were expanded and seeded onto poly-glycolic acid/poly-lactic acid scaffold for 14 days. Seeded tissue-engineered constructs (TEC) were subjected to cyclic flexure for 24 h, whereas control TEC was maintained in roller bottles for the same duration. hBMSC, TEC, and mechanically deformed TEC were subjected to gene-array and histological analysis. Expression levels of RNA and/or protein markers related to chondrogenesis (Sox9, MGP, RunX2, Col II, Col X, and Col XI) and osteogenesis (ALPL, BMP2, EDN1, RunX1, and Col I) were increased in TEC compared to unseeded hBMSC. Histological sections of TEC stained positive for Saffranin O, alkaline phosphatase activity, and calcium deposits. The expression levels of the above gene and protein markers further increased in deformed TEC compared to static TEC. Cell-scaffold interactions and mechanical stress results in gene expression suggestive of endochondral-ossification that impact upon ECM composition and may predispose them to eventual calcification.<newchar><newabs>27070720<newchar>Therapeutic efficacy of nanocarriers can be amplified by active targeting and overcoming the extracellular matrix associated barriers of tumors. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of oral antifibrotic agent (telmisartan) on tumor uptake and anticancer efficacy of EphA2 receptor targeted liposomes. Docetaxel loaded PEGylated liposomes (DPL) functionalized with nickel chelated phospholipid were prepared using a modified hydration method. DPL were incubated with various concentrations of histidine tagged EphA2 receptor specific peptide (YSA) to optimize particle size, zeta potential, and percentage YSA binding. Cellular uptake studies using various endocytosis blockers revealed that a caveolae dependent pathway was the major route for internalization of YSA anchored liposomes of docetaxel (YDPL) in A549 lung cancer cell line. Hydrodynamic diameter and zeta potential of optimized YDPL were 157.3 ± 11.8 nm and -3.64 mV, respectively. Orthotopic lung tumor xenograft (A549) bearing athymic nude mice treated with oral telmisartan (5 mg/kg) for 2 days showed significantly (p &lt; 0.05) higher uptake of YDPL in tumor tissues compared to healthy tissue. Average lung tumor weight of the YDPL + telmisartan treated group was 4.8- and 3.8-fold lower than that of the DPL and YDPL treated groups (p &lt; 0.05). Substantially lower expression (p &lt; 0.05) of EphA2 receptor protein, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), MMP-9, and collagen 1A level with increased E-cadherin and TIMP-1 levels in immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis of lung tumor samples of the combination group confirmed antifibrotic effect with enhanced anticancer activity. Active targeting and ECM remodeling synergistically contributed to anticancer efficacy of YDPL in orthotopic lung cancer.<newchar>EphA2 receptor<n-term>PEGylated liposomes<n-term>docetaxel<n-term>extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>orthotopic lung cancer<n-term>targeted drug delivery<n-term><newabs>26381424<newchar>Adipose stromal cells (ASC) are mesenchymal adipocyte progenitors that reside in the peri-endothelium of fat tissue. ASC mobilization and migration accompany white adipose tissue (WAT) remodeling and pathological conditions. Mechanisms regulating ASC trafficking are largely unknown. We previously reported that binding of the matricellular protein secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) to β1 integrin on ASC surface induces their motility. Here, we show that SPARC is required for ASC mobilization. We report two SPARC proteolytic isoforms, C-SPARC (lacking the N terminus) and N-SPARC (lacking the C terminus), generated in mesenteric WAT of obese mice. C-SPARC, but not N-SPARC, binds to β1 integrin on ASC, while N-SPARC preferentially binds to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and blocks ECM/integrin interaction. Interestingly, both C-SPARC and N-SPARC induce ASC deadhesion from the ECM, which is associated with modulation of integrin-dependent FAK-ERK signaling and integrin-independent ILK-Akt signaling. We show that these SPARC isoforms, acting on ASC through distinct mechanisms, have an additive effect in inducing ASC migration.<newchar>Adipose stromal cells<n-term>Mobilization<n-term>Obesity<n-term>Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine<n-term><newabs>26350342<newchar>Tissue regeneration during wound healing or cancer growth and progression depends on the establishment of a cellular microenvironment. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are part of this cellular microenvironment, where they functionally modulate cell homing, angiogenesis, and immune modulation. MSC recruitment involves detachment of these cells from their niche, and finally MSC migration into their preferred niches; the wounded area, the tumor bed, and the BM, just to name a few. During this recruitment phase, focal proteolysis disrupts the extracellular matrix (ECM) architecture, breaks cell-matrix interactions with receptors, and integrins, and causes the release of bioactive fragments from ECM molecules. MSC produce a broad array of proteases, promoting remodeling of the surrounding ECM through proteolytic mechanisms. The fibrinolytic system, with its main player plasmin, plays a crucial role in cell migration, growth factor bioavailability, and the regulation of other protease systems during inflammation, tissue regeneration, and cancer. Key components of the fibrinolytic cascade, including the urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), are expressed in MSC. This review will introduce general functional properties of the fibrinolytic system, which go beyond its known function of fibrin clot dissolution (fibrinolysis). We will focus on the role of the fibrinolytic system for MSC biology, summarizing our current understanding of the role of the fibrinolytic system for MSC recruitment and the functional consequences for tissue regeneration and cancer. Aspects of MSC origin, maintenance, and the mechanisms by which these cells contribute to altered protease activity in the microenvironment under normal and pathological conditions will also be discussed.<newchar>Cancer<n-term>Chemokine<n-term>Colorectal cancer<n-term>Hematopoiesis<n-term>Hypoxia<n-term>Integrin<n-term>MMP<n-term>Microenvironment<n-term>Niche<n-term>Plasmin<n-term>TGF-b<n-term>Tissue-type plasminogen activator<n-term>Wound healing<n-term>uPA<n-term>uPAR<n-term><newabs>23886381<newchar>Cardiac tissue is composed of muscle and non-muscle cells, surrounded by extracellular matrix (ECM) and spatially organized into a complex three-dimensional (3D) architecture to allow for coordinated contraction and electrical pulse propagation. Despite emerging evidence for cardiomyocyte turnover in mammalian hearts, the regenerative capacity of human cardiac tissue is insufficient to recover from damage, e.g. resulting from myocardial infarction (MI). Instead, the heart 'repairs' lost or injured tissue by ongoing synthesis and remodeling of scar tissue. Conventional therapies and timely (stem) cell delivery to the injured tissue markedly improve short-term function and remodeling, but do not attenuate later stage adverse remodeling, leading to functional deterioration and eventually failure of the heart. Material-based therapies have been successfully used to mechanically support and constrain the post-MI failing heart, preventing it from further remodeling and dilation. When designed to deliver the right microenvironment for endogenous or exogenous cells, as well as the mechanical and topological cues to guide neo-tissue formation, material-based therapies may even reverse remodeling and boost cardiac regeneration. This paper reviews the up-to-date status of material-based cardiac regeneration with special emphasis on 1) the use of bare biomaterials to deliver passive constraints that unload the heart, 2) the use of materials and cells to create engineered cardiac constructs for replacement, support, or regeneration of damaged myocardium, and 3) the development of bio-inspired and bioactive materials that aim to enhance the endogenous regenerative capacity of the heart. As the therapies should function in the infarcted heart, the damaged host environment and engineered in vitro test systems that mimic this environment, are reviewed as well.<newchar><newabs>26024311<newchar>Lysyl oxidases (LOX) are copper-dependent enzymes that oxidize primary amine substrates to reactive aldehydes. The best-studied role of LOX enzymes is the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in animals by cross-linking collagens and elastin, although intracellular functions have been reported as well. Five different LOX enzymes have been identified in mammals, LOX and LOX-like (LOXL) 1 to 4, showing a highly conserved catalytic carboxy terminal domain and more divergence in the rest of the sequence. Here we have surveyed a wide selection of genomes in order to infer the evolutionary history of LOX. We identified LOX proteins not only in animals, but also in many other eukaryotes, as well as in bacteria and archaea - which reveals a pre-metazoan origin for this gene family. LOX genes expanded during metazoan evolution resulting in two superfamilies, LOXL2/L3/L4 and LOX/L1/L5. Considering the current knowledge on the function of mammalian LOX isoforms in ECM remodeling, we propose that LOXL2/L3/L4 members might have preferentially been involved in making cross-linked collagen IV-based basement membrane, whereas the diversification of LOX/L1/L5 forms contributed to chordate/vertebrate-specific ECM innovations, such as elastin and fibronectin. Our work provides a novel view on the evolution of this family of enzymes.<newchar><newabs>26702834<newchar>ROCK signaling causes epidermal hyper-proliferation by increasing ECM production, elevating dermal stiffness, and enhancing Fak-mediated mechano-transduction signaling. Elevated dermal stiffness in turn causes ROCK activation, establishing mechano-reciprocity, a positive feedback loop that can promote tumors. We have identified a negative feedback mechanism that limits excessive ROCK signaling during wound healing and is lost in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). Signal flux through ROCK was selectively tuned down by increased levels of 14-3-3ζ, which interacted with Mypt1, a ROCK signaling antagonist. In 14-3-3ζ(-/-) mice, unrestrained ROCK signaling at wound margins elevated ECM production and reduced ECM remodeling, increasing dermal stiffness and causing rapid wound healing. Conversely, 14-3-3ζ deficiency enhanced cutaneous SCC size. Significantly, inhibiting 14-3-3ζ with a novel pharmacological agent accelerated wound healing 2-fold. Patient samples of chronic non-healing wounds overexpressed 14-3-3ζ, while cutaneous SCCs had reduced 14-3-3ζ. These results reveal a novel 14-3-3ζ-dependent mechanism that negatively regulates mechano-reciprocity, suggesting new therapeutic opportunities.<newchar>14-3-3ζ<n-term>MYPT<n-term>ROCK<n-term>RhoA<n-term>RhoC<n-term>mechano-reciprocity<n-term>mechano-transduction<n-term>re-epithelialization<n-term>wound healing<n-term><newabs>23122413<newchar>Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a key histopathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis of the Dutch type (HCHWA-D). CAA is characterized by amyloid-beta (Aβ) depositions and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in brain vessels and plays an important role in the development and progression of both AD and HCHWA-D. Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) modulates the ECM by molecular cross-linking of ECM proteins. Here, we investigated the distribution pattern, cellular source, and activity of tTG in CAA in control, AD, and HCHWA-D cases. We observed increased tTG immunoreactivity and colocalization with Aβ in the vessel wall in early stage CAA, whereas in later CAA stages, tTG and its cross-links were present in halos enclosing the Aβ deposition. In CAA, tTG and its cross-links at the abluminal side of the vessel were demonstrated to be either of astrocytic origin in parenchymal vessels, of fibroblastic origin in leptomeningeal vessels, and of endothelial origin at the luminal side of the deposited Aβ. Furthermore, the ECM proteins fibronectin and laminin colocalized with the tTG-positive halos surrounding the deposited Aβ in CAA. However, we observed that in situ tTG activity was present throughout the vessel wall in late stage CAA. Together, our data suggest that tTG and its activity might play a differential role in the development and progression of CAA, possibly evolving from direct modulation of Aβ aggregation to cross-linking of ECM proteins resulting in ECM restructuring.<newchar><newabs>25819453<newchar>Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, CCN2) contributes to fibrotic responses in diabetic retinopathy, both before clinical manifestations occur in the pre-clinical stage of diabetic retinopathy (PCDR) and in proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), the late clinical stage of the disease. CTGF is a secreted protein that modulates the actions of many growth factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, leading to tissue reorganization, such as ECM formation and remodeling, basal lamina (BL) thickening, pericyte apoptosis, angiogenesis, wound healing and fibrosis. In PCDR, CTGF contributes to thickening of the retinal capillary BL and is involved in loss of pericytes. In this stage, CTGF expression is induced by advanced glycation end products, and by growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β. In PDR, the switch from neovascularization to a fibrotic phase - the angio-fibrotic switch - in PDR is driven by CTGF, in a critical balance with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). We discuss here the roles of CTGF in the pathogenesis of DR in relation to ECM remodeling and wound healing mechanisms, and explore whether CTGF may be a potential novel therapeutic target in the clinical management of early as well as late stages of DR.<newchar>Angio-fibrotic switch<n-term>Basal lamina thickening<n-term>Connective tissue growth factor<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Pre-clinical diabetic retinopathy<n-term>Proliferative diabetic retinopathy<n-term>Wound healing<n-term><newabs>26668310<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling regulates angiogenesis. However, the precise mechanisms by which structural changes in ECM proteins contribute to angiogenesis are not fully understood. Integrins are molecules with the ability to detect compositional and structural changes within the ECM and integrate this information into a network of signaling circuits that coordinate context-dependent cell behavior. The role of integrin αvβ3 in angiogenesis is complex, as evidence exists for both positive and negative functions. The precise downstream signaling events initiated by αvβ3 may depend on the molecular characteristics of its ligands. Here, we identified an RGD-containing cryptic collagen epitope that is generated in vivo. Surprisingly, rather than inhibiting αvβ3 signaling, this collagen epitope promoted αvβ3 activation and stimulated angiogenesis and inflammation. An antibody directed to this RGDKGE epitope but not other RGD collagen epitopes inhibited angiogenesis and inflammation in vivo. The selective ability of this RGD epitope to promote angiogenesis and inflammation depends in part on its flanking KGE motif. Interestingly, a subset of macrophages may represent a physiologically relevant source of this collagen epitope. Here, we define an endothelial cell mechano-signaling pathway in which a cryptic collagen epitope activates αvβ3 leading to an Src and p38 MAPK-dependent cascade that leads to nuclear accumulation of Yes-associated protein (YAP) and stimulation of endothelial cell growth. Collectively, our findings not only provide evidence for a novel mechano-signaling pathway, but also define a possible therapeutic strategy to control αvβ3 signaling by targeting a pro-angiogenic and inflammatory ligand of αvβ3 rather than the receptor itself.<newchar>Yes-associated protein (YAP)<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>collagen<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>inflammation<n-term>integrin<n-term>p38 MAPK<n-term><newabs>20555391<newchar>Platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (PDECGF) is a potent angiogenic peptide with anti-apoptotic activity expressed widely in tumours. However, its expression in myocardial infarction (MI) is not yet established. This study aimed to assess the myocardial expression of PDECGF in rats after MI. Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling plays an important role in angiogenesis; hence, changes in the ECM components were investigated in the myocardium after MI, which was induced in rats by coronary artery ligation (CAL) and verified using biochemical markers and histopathology. Immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR, and activity assays identified the expression pattern of PDECGF on days 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 after CAL. The levels of TNF-alpha, MMP-2, collagen, and glycosaminoglycans in the ECM were assessed. Studies on immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR, and PDECGF activity demonstrated elevated levels of PDECGF expression from day 2 after CAL. Macrophages, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and cardiomyocytes, especially at the border region of the lesion, showed an enhanced expression for PDECGF. Remodeling of the ECM was depicted by changes in the levels of TNF-alpha, MMP-2, collagen, and GAG. Hence, this study clearly indicated PDECGF as an important angiogenic molecule expressed during MI and the alterations in ECM components facilitated the process of angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>24980950<newchar>The host response to both synthetic and biologically derived biomaterials is a temporally regulated, complex process that involves multiple interacting cell types. This complexity has classically limited the efficacy of in vitro assays for predicting the in vivo outcome, necessitating the use of costly animal models for biomaterial development. The present study addressed these challenges by developing an in vitro assay that characterized the dynamic inflammatory response of human monocyte-derived-macrophages to biomaterials, coupled with quasi-mechanistic analysis in silico analysis: principal component analysis (PCA) and dynamic network analysis (DyNA). Synthetic and extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived materials were evaluated using this method, and were then associated with the in vivo remodeling and macrophage polarization response in a rodent skeletal muscle injury model. PCA and DyNA revealed a distinct in vitro macrophage response to ECM materials that corresponded to constructive remodeling and an increased M2 macrophage presence in vivo. In contrast, PCA and DyNA suggested a response to crosslinked ECM and synthetic materials characteristic of a foreign body reaction and dominant M1 macrophage response. These results suggest that in silico analysis of an in vitro macrophage assay may be useful as a predictor for determining the in vivo host response to implanted biomaterials.<newchar><newabs>17869171<newchar>Appropriate matrix formation, turnover and remodeling in tissue-engineered small diameter vascular conduits are crucial for their long-term function. The interaction between cells and extra-cellular components is indispensable in determining cellular behavior in tissues and on biomaterials. The fibrin that contains fibronectin shows promise in most aspects as a tissue engineering scaffold, whereas, deposition of elastin and collagen by endothelial cells grown in the lumen of the construct is desirable to improve post implant retention, mechanical stability and vaso-responsiveness. So far there is no report on production of extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins, elastin and collagen by endothelial cells (EC) in in vitro culture conditions. In this study, we have used a biomimetic approach of providing multiple growth factors (GF) in the fibronectin (FN)-containing fibrin matrix to induce production of elastin and collagen by the endothelial cells for application in vascular tissue engineering. Deposition of elastin and collagens with matrix remodeling is demonstrated through qualitative analysis of the matrices that were recovered after growing cells on the initial fibrin-FN-GF matrix. Expressions of mRNA for both proteins were assessed by real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to estimate the effects of multiple growth factor compositions. Marked deposition of elastin and collagen was evidenced by staining the recovered matrix after different culture intervals. Obviously, the biomimetic environment created by adding angiogenic and platelet growth factors in the fibrin-fibronectin-gelatin matrix can induce deposition of collagens and elastin by EC.<newchar><newabs>24786326<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of naturally occurring extracellular matrix (ECM) can provide a microenvironmental niche that alters the default healing response toward a constructive and functional outcome. The present study showed similarities in the remodeling characteristics of xenogeneic ECM scaffolds when used as a surgical treatment for volumetric muscle loss in both a preclinical rodent model and five male patients. Porcine urinary bladder ECM scaffold implantation was associated with perivascular stem cell mobilization and accumulation within the site of injury, and de novo formation of skeletal muscle cells. The ECM-mediated constructive remodeling was associated with stimulus-responsive skeletal muscle in rodents and functional improvement in three of the five human patients.<newchar><newabs>17256179<newchar>Relatively low doses of space radiation have been correlated with an increased incidence and earlier appearance of cataracts in space travelers. The lens is a radiosensitive organ of the body with a very obvious late end point of radiation damage--cataract. However, many molecular changes occur in the lens soon after radiation exposure and long before the appearance of an opacification. The goal of our research is to elucidate early mechanisms associated with particle radiation-induced cataractogenesis, with the ultimate goal of developing countermeasures. Normal, cultured non-immortalized human lens cells were grown on matrix-coated plastic tissue culture vessels and irradiated with particle beams at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL) or at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at Brookhaven National Lab. Samples were harvested at different times after radiation exposure. Using a focused genetic approach, total RNA and protein extracts from control and irradiated samples were processed and probed for the expression of genes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) proteases. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have previously been studied in adult postmortem human lenses, in post-cataract intraocular lens (IOL) surgery capsular bags and with immortalized human lens cell cultures. Significant differences exist in the expression pattern with these various model systems. We have evidence for the cell stage-specific expression of MMP family of genes during lens fiber differentiation, and for radiation-induced alterations in the misregulation of MMP expression. Our data indicate that radiation exposure may lead to differences in the expression of radiation stress responses, which may impact selective ECM remodeling and cell differentiation.<newchar><newabs>11193034<newchar>Programmed cell death or apoptosis is an important aspect in organogenesis and tissue remodeling. It is precisely controlled both temporally and spatially during development. Amphibian metamorphosis is an excellent model to study developmental control of apoptosis in vertebrates. This process involves the transformation of essentially every organ/tissue as tadpoles change to frogs, yet is controlled by a single hormone, thyroid hormone (TH). Although different organs and tissues undergo vastly different developmental changes, including de novo development and total resorption, most require apoptotic elimination of at least some cell types. Such properties and the dependence on TH make frog metamorphosis a unique model to isolate and functionally characterize genes participating in the regulation of tissue specific cell death during organ development in vertebrates. Indeed, molecular studies of the TH-dependent gene regulation cascade have led to the discovery of a group of genes encoding matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) participating in metamorphosis. In vivo and in vitro studies have provided strong evidence to support a role of MMP-mediated remodeling of the extracellular matrix in regulating apoptotic tissue remodeling during metamorphosis.<newchar><newabs>19838811<newchar>Reversion-inducing-cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs (RECK) is a single membrane-anchored MMP-regulator and regulates matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2, 9 and 14. In turn, MMPs are endopeptidases that play a pivotal role in remodeling ECM. In this work, we decided to evaluate expression pattern of RECK in growing rat incisor during, specifically focusing out amelogenesis process. Based on different kinds of ameloblasts, our results showed that RECK expression was conducted by secretory and post-secretory ameloblasts. At the secretory phase, RECK was localized in the infra-nuclear region of the ameloblast, outer epithelium, near blood vessels, and in the stellate reticulum. From the transition to the maturation phases, RECK was strongly expressed by non-epithelial immuno-competent cells (macrophages and/or dendritic-like cells) in the papillary layer. From the transition to the maturation stage, RECK expression was increased. RECK mRNA was amplified by RT-PCR from whole enamel organ. Here, we verified the presence of RECK mRNA during all stages of amelogenesis. These events were governed by ameloblasts and by non-epithelial cells residents in the enamel organ. Concluding, we found differential expression of MMPs-2, -9 and RECK in the different phases of amelogenesis, suggesting that the tissue remodeling is rigorously controlled during dental mineralization.<newchar><newabs>25070059<newchar>Normal fibroblasts produce extracellular matrix (ECM) components that form the structural framework of tissues. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) with an activated phenotype mainly contribute to ECM deposition and construction of cancer masses. However, the stroma of breast cancer tissues has been shown to be more complicated, and the mechanisms through which CAFs influence ECM deposition remain elusive. In this study, we found that the activated fibroblast marker α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was only present in the stroma of breast cancer tissue, and the CAFs isolated from invasive breast cancer sample remained to be activated and proliferative in passages. To further assess the difference between CAFs and normal breast fibroblasts (NFs), MALDI TOF/TOF‑MS was used to analyze the secretory proteins of primary CAFs and NFs. In total, 2,903 and 3,023 proteins were identified. Mass spectrum quantitative assay and data analysis for extracellular proteins indicated that the CAFs produce less collagens and matrix-degrading enzymes compared with NFs. This finding was confirmed by western blot analysis. Furthermore, we discovered that reduced collagen deposition was present in the stroma of invasive breast cancer. These studies showed that although CAFs from invasive breast cancer possess an activated phenotype, they secreted less collagen and induced less ECM deposition in cancer stroma. In cancer tissue, the remodeling of stromal structure and tumor microenvironment might, therefore, be attributed to the biological changes in CAFs including their protein expression profile.<newchar><newabs>25896393<newchar>Liver fibrogenesis is a dynamic and highly integrated molecular, tissue and cellular process that during the course of a chronic liver disease (CLD) leads progressively to an excess deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in an attempt to limit the consequences of chronic parenchymal injury. Irrespective of etiology, liver fibrogenesis is sustained and modulated by an intense cross talk occurring between different hepatic cell populations that involves the synthesis and release of several mediators, including growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, reactive oxygen species, adipokines, vasoactive agents and plasma proteins. In this scenario a major pro-fibrogenic role is played by a heterogeneous population of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) positive cells defined as hepatic myofibroblasts (MFs). Hepatic MFs are highly proliferative and contractile cells, primarily responsible for excess deposition of ECM components and involved in ECM altered remodeling observed in CLDs. MFs also represent a unique and critical cellular crossroad able to integrate incoming paracrine or autocrine signals, released from all hepatic cell populations involved or available in the microenvironment, as well as to synthetize and release mediators which sustain and perpetuate fibrogenesis, chronic inflammatory response and neo-angiogenesis. This review has been designed to offer critical knowledge on hepatic MFs, including terminology, essential definitions and characterization of MFs, with a focus on the origin of these cells (mainly from hepatic stellate cells and portal fibroblasts or, to a lesser extent, bone marrow-derived cells), the process of activation and the functional responses that these cells can operate in the fibrogenic progression of CLDs.<newchar><newabs>22341938<newchar>Acellular biologic scaffolds are commonly used to facilitate the constructive remodeling of three of the four traditional tissue types: connective, epithelial, and muscle tissues. However, the application of extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds to neural tissue has been limited, particularly in the central nervous system (CNS) where intrinsic regenerative potential is low. The ability of decellularized liver, lung, muscle, and other tissues to support tissue-specific cell phenotype and function suggests that CNS-derived biologic scaffolds may help to overcome barriers to mammalian CNS repair. A method was developed to create CNS ECM scaffolds from porcine optic nerve, spinal cord, and brain, with decellularization verified against established criteria. CNS ECM scaffolds retained neurosupportive proteins and growth factors and, when tested with the PC12 cell line in vitro, were cytocompatible and stimulated proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Urinary bladder ECM (a non-CNS ECM scaffold) was also cytocompatible and stimulated PC12 proliferation but inhibited migration rather than acting as a chemoattractant over the same concentration range while inducing greater rates of PC12 differentiation compared to CNS ECM. These results suggest that CNS ECM may provide tissue-specific advantages in CNS regenerative medicine applications and that ECM scaffolds in general may aid functional recovery after CNS injury.<newchar><newabs>21316440<newchar>Apolipoprotein E knockout (apoE-KO) mice have been utilized for decades as a model of atherosclerosis. However, in addition to atherosclerosis, apoE-KO mice develop extensive cutaneous xanthomatosis, accelerated skin aging and frailty when fed a high fat diet. Granzyme B (GrB) is a pro-apoptotic serine protease that has recently been shown to exhibit extracellular proteolytic activity in certain pathologies. In the present study, the role of GrB in skin aging and pathology was assessed using the apoE-KO model of skin aging. Male C57BL/6 wild type and apoE-KO mice were grown for 0, 5, 15 or 30 weeks on either a high fat (21.2% fat, 0.2% cholesterol) or regular chow diet (7% fat). ApoE/GrB double knockout (DKO) mice were also generated and assessed after being fed either diet for 30 weeks. Skin was removed from the mid to lower back and examined for age-related changes such as hair loss, skin thinning and collagen remodeling and disorganization. ApoE-KO mice exhibited signs of frailty, hair graying, hair loss, skin thinning, loss of collagen density and increased skin pathologies featuring collagen remodeling and reduced decorin compared to wild type controls. These phenotypes occurred earlier and were more severe when fed a high fat diet. In addition, we also observed increased GrB expression in proximity to areas of decorin degradation and reduced collagen density in the skin of apoE-KO mice. DKO mice exhibited protection against skin thinning, ECM degradation and loss of dermal collagen density. In summary, our results provide novel insights into the effects of a high fat diet and apoE deficiency on skin aging and pathology and suggest a role for GrB in age-related skin thinning and frailty.<newchar><newabs>19699300<newchar>Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP1) is an endocytic receptor for diverse proteases, protease inhibitors, and other plasma membrane proteins, including the urokinase receptor (uPAR). LRP1 also functions in cell-signaling and regulates gene expression. The goal of this study was to determine whether LRP1 regulates remodeling of provisional extracellular matrix (ECM) by fibroblasts. To address this problem, we utilized an in vitro model in which type I collagen was reconstituted and overlaid with fibronectin. Either the collagen or fibronectin was fluorescently-labeled. ECM remodeling by fibroblasts deficient in LRP1, uPAR, or MT1-MMP was studied. MT1-MMP was required for efficient remodeling of the deep collagen layer but not involved in fibronectin remodeling. Instead, fibronectin was remodeled by a system that required urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), uPAR, and exogenously-added plasminogen. LRP1 markedly inhibited fibronectin remodeling by regulating cell-surface uPAR and plasminogen activation. LRP1 also regulated remodeling of the deep collagen layer but not by controlling MT1-MMP. Instead, LRP1 deficiency or inhibition de-repressed a secondary pathway for collagen remodeling, which was active in MT1-MMP-deficient cells but not in uPAR-deficient cells. These results demonstrate that LRP1 regulates ECM remodeling principally by repressing pathways that require plasminogen activation by uPA in association with uPAR.<newchar><newabs>25218173<newchar>Dyslipemia has a direct impact on cardiac remodeling by altering extracellular matrix (ECM) components. One of the main ECM components is elastin, a proteic three-dimensional network that can be efficiently degraded by cysteine proteases or cathepsins. Dyslipemic status in insulin resistance and combined hyperlipoproteinemia diseases include raised levels of very low density lipoproteins (VLDL), triglyceride (TG)-cholesteryl ester (CE)-rich lipoproteins. Enhanced VLDL concentration promotes cardiomyocyte intracellular cholesteryl ester (CE) accumulation in a LRP1-dependent manner. The aim of this work was to analyze the effect of cardiomyocyte intracellular CE accumulation on tropoelastin (TE) characteristics and to investigate the role of LRP1 and cathepsin S (CatS) on these effects. Molecular studies showed that LRP1 deficiency impaired CE selective uptake and accumulation from TG-CE-rich lipoproteins (VLDL+IDL) and CE-rich lipoproteins (aggregated LDL, agLDL). Biochemical and confocal microscopic studies showed that LRP1-mediated intracellular CE accumulation increased CatS mature protein levels and induced an altered intracellular TE globule structure. Biophysical studies evidenced that LRP1-mediated intracellular CE accumulation caused a significant drop of Tg2 glass transition temperature of cardiomyocyte secreted TE. Moreover, CatS deficiency prevented the alterations in TE intracellular globule structure and on TE glass transition temperature. These results demonstrate that LRP1-mediated cardiomyocyte intracellular CE accumulation alters the structural and physical characteristics of secreted TE through an increase in CatS mature protein levels. Therefore, the modulation of LRP1-mediated intracellular CE accumulation in cardiomyocytes could impact pathological ventricular remodeling associated with insulin-resistance and combined hyperlipoproteinemia, pathologies characterized by enhanced concentrations of TG-CE-rich lipoproteins.<newchar>Cardiac remodeling<n-term>Cardiomyocyte<n-term>Cathepsin S<n-term>Intracellular cholesterol esters<n-term>Tropoelastin<n-term>VLDL<n-term><newabs>20965166<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis is defined as a progressive accumulation of fibrillar extracellular matrix (ECM) in the myocardium. The regulation of extracellular matrix remodeling is primarily mediated by cardiac fibroblasts (CF). Evidences suggest that various T lymphocyte phenotypes differentially affect organ fibrosis through modulating CF collagen and MMP/TIMP gene expression, MMP activity and cardiac collagen cross-linking, leading to altered ECM composition. In regard to the importance of cytokines in cardiac fibrosis and heart failure, in this review, we will address the role of different T cell subsets in inflammation-mediated cardiac fibrosis, from a distinct perspective of T cell and fibroblast interaction. We conclude that in addition to preventive strategies, therapies based on deviation of Th1/Th2 paradigm, and manipulation of Tregs and Th17 would show promising results in future studies.<newchar><newabs>26709763<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc dependent endopeptidases whose main function is to degrade and deposit structural proteins within the extracellular matrix (ECM). A dysregulation of MMPs is linked to vascular diseases. MMPs are classified into collagenases, gelatinases, membrane-type, metalloelastase, stromelysins, matrilysins, enamelysins, and unclassified subgroups. The production of MMPs is stimulated by factors such as oxidative stress, growth factors and inflammation which lead to its up- or down-regulation with subsequent ECM remodeling. Normally, excess activation of MMPs is controlled by their endogenous inhibitors, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). An imbalance of MMPs and TIMPs has been implicated in hypertension, atherosclerotic plaque formation and instability, aortic aneurysms and varicose vein wall remodeling. Also, recent evidence suggests epigenetic regulation of some MMPs in angiogenesis and atherosclerosis. Over the years, pharmacological inhibitors of MMPs have been used to modify or prevent the development of the disease with some success. In this review, we discuss recent advances in MMP biology, and their involvement in the manifestation of vascular disease.<newchar><newabs>22310347<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides a physical framework for the cells and functions as a gel medium. Remodeling of the ECM is crucial during physiological cell migration, proliferation, growth, and development. Thus, the interaction between cells and the ECM plays a key role in normal development and differentiation of organisms. However, remodeling of the ECM also occurs in many pathological states. Changes in the ECM are regulated by a system of proteolytic enzymes that are responsible for the proteolysis of a huge quantity of ECM components. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) represent the main group of regulating proteases in the ECM. By regulating the composition and integrity of the ECM, this group of enzymes is essential for cell proliferation, differentiation, and processes of apoptosis. However, deregulation or activation of MMP expression is a feature of numerous pathologic conditions including tumorigenesis and metastasis. The aim of this article is to provide a brief overview of MMPs, their nomenclature and structure, and their role in the development of tumors and metastases.<newchar><newabs>23939298<newchar>Unlike humans, certain adult vertebrates such as newts and zebrafish possess extraordinary abilities to functionally regenerate lost appendages and injured organs, including cardiac muscle. Here, we present new evidence that a remodeled extracellular matrix (ECM) directs cell activities essential for cardiac muscle regeneration. Comprehensive mining of DNA microarrays and Gene Ontology term enrichment analyses for regenerating newt and zebrafish hearts revealed that distinct ECM components and ECM-modifying proteases are among the most significantly enriched genes in response to local injury. In contrast, data analyses for mammalian cardiac injury models indicated that inflammation and metabolic processes are the most significantly activated gene groups. In the regenerating newt heart, we show dynamic spatial and temporal changes in tenascin-C, hyaluronic acid, and fibronectin ECM distribution as early as 3 days postamputation. Linked to distinct matrix remodeling, we demonstrate a myocardium-wide proliferative response and radial migration of progenitor cells. In particular, we report dramatic upregulation of a regeneration-specific matrix in the epicardium that precedes the accumulation and migration of progenitor cells. For the first time, we show that the regenerative ECM component tenascin-C significantly increases newt cardiomyocyte cell cycle reentry in vitro. Thus, the engineering of nature-tested extracellular matrices may provide new strategic opportunities for the enhancement of regenerative responses in mammals.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Heart<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term>Newt<n-term>Regeneration<n-term><newabs>25429840<newchar>During angiogenesis, sprouting microvessels interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM) by degrading and reorganizing the matrix, applying traction forces, and producing deformation. Morphometric features of the resulting microvascular network are affected by the interaction between the matrix and angiogenic microvessels. The objective of this study was to develop a continuous-discrete modeling approach to simulate mechanical interactions between growing neovessels and the deformation of the matrix in vitro. This was accomplished by coupling an existing angiogenesis growth model which uses properties of the ECM to regulate angiogenic growth with the nonlinear finite element software FEBio (www.febio.org). FEBio solves for the deformation and remodeling of the matrix caused by active stress generated by neovessel sprouts, and this deformation was used to update the ECM into the current configuration. After mesh resolution and parameter sensitivity studies, the model was used to accurately predict vascular alignment for various matrix boundary conditions. Alignment primarily arises passively as microvessels convect with the deformation of the matrix, but active alignment along collagen fibrils plays a role as well. Predictions of alignment were most sensitive to the range over which active stresses were applied and the viscoelastic time constant in the material model. The computational framework provides a flexible platform for interpreting in vitro investigations of vessel-matrix interactions, predicting new experiments, and simulating conditions that are outside current experimental capabilities.<newchar><newabs>24604535<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling contributes to the pathogenic changes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and is both complex and not well understood. Collagen I, a component of the ECM altered in COPD airways, has second harmonic generation (SHG) properties. The SHG signal is coherent, propagating both forward (F) (primarily organized/mature collagen fibrils) and backward (B) (primarily disorganized/immature collagen fibrils) parallel to the incident light. The F/B SHG ratio was used to determine the proportion of organized to disorganized collagen, with lower variation in F/B ratio between sampling regions within the same patient and between patients in the same disease group compared with analyzing F and B data alone. The F/B ratio was independent of laser power drift, regions analyzed within a tissue and tissue orientation during analysis. Using this method, we identified a significant difference in collagen organization in airway tissue between COPD and non diseased. We have developed a robust optimization and calibration methodology that will allow direct comparison of data obtained at different times and from multiple microscopes, which is directly adaptable for use with other tissue types. We report a powerful new tool for advancing our understanding of pathological ECM remodeling that may uncover new therapeutic targets in the future.<newchar><newabs>22100229<newchar>Remodeling of the cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) is an integral part of wound healing and ventricular adaptation after myocardial infarction (MI), but the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Fibulin-2 is an ECM protein upregulated during cardiac development and skin wound healing, yet mice lacking fibulin-2 do not display any identifiable phenotypic abnormalities. To investigate the effects of fibulin-2 deficiency on ECM remodeling after MI, we induced experimental MI by permanent coronary artery ligation in both fibulin-2 null and wild-type mice. Fibulin-2 expression was up-regulated at the infarct border zone of the wild-type mice. Acute myocardial tissue responses after MI, including inflammatory cell infiltration and ECM protein synthesis and deposition in the infarct border zone, were markedly attenuated in the fibulin-2 null mice. However, the fibulin-2 null mice had significantly better survival rate after MI compared to the wild-type mice as a result of less frequent cardiac rupture and preserved left ventricular function. Up-regulation of TGF-β signaling and ECM remodeling after MI were attenuated in both ischemic and non-ischemic myocardium of the fibulin-2 null mice compared to the wild type counterparts. Increase in TGF-β signaling in response to angiotensin II was also lessened in cardiac fibroblasts isolated from the fibulin-2 null mice. The studies provide the first evidence that absence of fibulin-2 results in decreased up-regulation of TGF-β signaling after MI and protects against ventricular dysfunction, suggesting that fibulin-2 may be a potential therapeutic target for attenuating the progression of ventricular remodeling.<newchar><newabs>21460120<newchar>Airway remodeling, which includes increases in the extracellular matrix (ECM), is a characteristic feature of asthma and is correlated to disease severity. Rhinovirus (RV) infections are associated with increased risk of asthma development in young children and are the most common cause of asthma exacerbations. We examined whether viral infections can increase ECM deposition and whether this increased ECM modulates cell proliferation and migration. RV infection of nonasthmatic airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells significantly increased the deposition of fibronectin (40% increase, n = 12) and perlecan (80% increase, n = 14), while infection of asthmatic ASM cells significantly increased fibronectin (75% increase, n = 9) and collagen IV (15% increase, n = 9). We then treated the ASM cells with the Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid, imiquimod, and pure RV RNA and were able to show that the mechanism through which RV induced ECM deposition was via the activation of TLR3 and TLR7/8. Finally, we assessed whether the virus-induced ECM was bioactive by measuring the amount of migration and proliferation of virus-naive cells that seeded onto the ECM. Basically, ECM from asthmatic ASM cells induced twofold greater migration of virus-naive ASM cells than ECM from nonasthmatic ASM cells, and these rates of migration were further increased on RV-modulated ECM. Increased migration on the RV-modulated ECM was not due to increased cell proliferation, as RV-modulated ECM decreased the proliferation of virus-naive cells. Our results suggest that viruses may contribute to airway remodeling through increased ECM deposition, which in turn may contribute to increased ASM mass via increased cell migration.<newchar><newabs>25368556<newchar>Dendritic spines are the receptive contacts at most excitatory synapses in the central nervous system. Spines are dynamic in the developing brain, changing shape as they mature as well as appearing and disappearing as they make and break connections. Spines become much more stable in adulthood, and spine structure must be actively maintained to support established circuit function. At the same time, adult spines must retain some plasticity so their structure can be modified by activity and experience. As such, the regulation of spine stability and remodeling in the adult animal is critical for normal function, and disruption of these processes is associated with a variety of late onset diseases including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. The extracellular matrix (ECM), composed of a meshwork of proteins and proteoglycans, is a critical regulator of spine and synapse stability and plasticity. While the role of ECM receptors in spine regulation has been extensively studied, considerably less research has focused directly on the role of specific ECM ligands. Here, we review the evidence for a role of several brain ECM ligands and remodeling proteases in the regulation of dendritic spine and synapse formation, plasticity, and stability in adults.<newchar>RGD peptide<n-term>agrin<n-term>chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans<n-term>dendritic spine<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular proteases<n-term>integrins<n-term>reelin<n-term><newabs>25606449<newchar>Intracranial aneurysm (IA) accounts for 85% of Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (SAH) and is mainly caused due to the weakening of arterial wall. The structural integrity of the intracranial arteries is mainly influenced by the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The Proteoglycan Versican plays an important role in extracellular matrix assembly and plays a major role in the pathogenesis of IA. The linkage studies also indicated VCAN as a putative candidate gene for IA in the 5q22-31 region. Using a case-control study design, we tested the hypothesis whether the variants in VCAN gene, nonsynonymous variants in the coding region of Glycosaminoglycan α (GAG-α) and GAG-β and two reported SNPs involved in splicing rs251124 and rs173686 can increase the risk of aSAH among South Indian patients, either independently, or by interacting with other risk factors of the disease. We selected 200 radiologically confirmed aneurysmal cases and 250 ethnically, age and sex matched controls from the Dravidian Malayalam speaking population of South India. The present study reiterated the earlier association of rs251124 with intracranial aneurysm (P = 0.0002) and also found a novel association with rs2287926 (G428D) in exon 7 coding for GAG-α with intracranial aneurysm (P = 0.0015). Interestingly, both these SNPs contributed to higher risk for aneurysm in males. In-silico analysis predicted this SNP to have the highest functional relevance in the gene which might have a potentially altered regulatory role in transcription and splicing. Using meta-analysis with available literature rs251124 was found to be the strongest intracranial aneurysm marker for global ethnicities. This study with a novel functional SNP rs2287926 (G428D) further substantiates the potential role of VCAN in the pathogenesis of IA.<newchar>AVM, Arteriovenous malformation<n-term>CI, Confidence intervals<n-term>Case–control<n-term>ECM, Extracellular matrix<n-term>Extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>GAG-α, Glycosaminoglycan α<n-term>GAG-β, Glycosaminoglycan β<n-term>IA, Intracranial aneurysm<n-term>Intracranial aneurysm<n-term>LD, Linkage disequilibrium<n-term>LOX, Lysyl oxidase<n-term>Polymorphism<n-term>SNP, Single nucleotide polymorphism<n-term>South India<n-term>VCAN, Versican<n-term>Versican<n-term>WFNS, World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies<n-term>aSAH, aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage<n-term><newabs>11842241<newchar>The process of angiogenesis is a dynamic one. Vascular endothelial cells are changing at the same time the extracellular matrix is being remodeled. Stupack and Cheresh discuss how remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and changes in the endothelial cell protein production and integrin expression contribute to the complex process of new blood vessel growth from an existing vascular bed.<newchar><newabs>26174933<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a key regulator of tissue morphogenesis and repair. However, its composition and architecture are not well characterized. Here, we monitor remodeling of the extracellular niche in tissue repair in the bleomycin-induced lung injury mouse model. Mass spectrometry quantified 8,366 proteins from total tissue and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) over the course of 8 weeks, surveying tissue composition from the onset of inflammation and fibrosis to its full recovery. Combined analysis of proteome, secretome, and transcriptome highlighted post-transcriptional events during tissue fibrogenesis and defined the composition of airway epithelial lining fluid. To comprehensively characterize the ECM, we developed a quantitative detergent solubility profiling (QDSP) method, which identified Emilin-2 and collagen-XXVIII as novel constituents of the provisional repair matrix. QDSP revealed which secreted proteins interact with the ECM, and showed drastically altered association of morphogens to the insoluble matrix upon injury. Thus, our proteomic systems biology study assigns proteins to tissue compartments and uncovers their dynamic regulation upon lung injury and repair, potentially contributing to the development of anti-fibrotic strategies.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>proteomics<n-term>regeneration<n-term>secretome<n-term><newabs>25669988<newchar>Conventional bioreactors are used to enhance extracellular matrix (ECM) production and mechanical strength of tissue-engineered vessels (TEVs) by applying circumferential strain, which is uniaxial stretching. However, the resulting TEVs still suffer from inadequate mechanical properties, where rupture strengths and compliance values are still very different from native arteries. The biomechanical milieu of native arteries consists of both circumferential and axial loading. Therefore, to better simulate the physiological stresses acting on native arteries, we built a novel bioreactor system to enable biaxial stretching of engineered arteries during culture. This new bioreactor system allows for independent control of circumferential and axial stretching parameters, such as displacement and beat rate. The assembly and setup processes for this biaxial bioreactor system are reliable with a success rate greater than 75% for completion of long-term sterile culture. This bioreactor also supports side-by-side assessments of TEVs that are cultured under three types of mechanical conditions (static, uniaxial, and biaxial), all within the same biochemical environment. Using this bioreactor, we examined the impact of biaxial stretching on arterial wall remodeling of TEVs. Biaxial TEVs developed the greatest wall thickness compared with static and uniaxial TEVs. Unlike uniaxial loading, biaxial loading led to undulated collagen fibers that are commonly found in native arteries. More importantly, the biaxial TEVs developed the most mature elastin in the ECM, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The presence of mature extracellular elastin along with the undulated collagen fibers may contribute to the observed vascular compliance in the biaxial TEVs. The current work shows that biaxial stretching is a novel and promising means to improve TEV generation. Furthermore, this novel system allows us to optimize biomechanical conditioning by unraveling the interrelationships among the applied mechanical stress, the resulting ECM properties, and the mechanics of TEVs.<newchar><newabs>21156214<newchar>Several studies suggested that long-term nitrate therapy may produce negative outcomes in patient mortality and morbidity. A possible mechanism may involve nitrate-mediated activation of various extracellular matrix (ECM) proteases, particularly matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and adhesion molecules in human macrophages, leading to the destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. We examined the gene and protein regulating effects on THP-1 human macrophages by repeated exposure to therapeutically relevant concentrations of nitroglycerin (NTG) and possible involvement of nuclear factor (NF)-κB signaling mechanism in mediating some of these observed effects. THP-1 human macrophages repeatedly exposed to NTG (at 10 nM, added on days 1, 4 and 7) exhibited extensive alterations in the expression of multiple genes encoding ECM proteases and adhesion molecules. These effects were dissimilar to those produced by a direct nitric oxide donor, diethylenetriamine NONOate. NTG exposure significantly up-regulated NF-κB DNA nuclear binding activity and MMP-9 protein expression, and reduced tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) expression; these effects were abrogated in the presence of the NF-κB inhibitor parthenolide (a chemical inhibitor derived from the feverfew plant). Further, we examined whether our in vitro findings (an elevated MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio and gelatinase activity) can be translated to in vivo effects, in a rat model. Sprague-Dawley rats exposed continuously to NTG subcutaneously for 8 days via mini-osmotic pumps showed significant induction of plasma MMP-9 dimer concentrations and the expression of a complex of MMP-9 with lipocalin-2 or neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL). Plasma gelatinase activity was significantly increased by NTG over the entire study period, attaining peak elevation at day 6. Plasma TIMP-1 protein was down-regulated significantly by day 2 and days 4-7 in the NTG-treated rats. Pharmacokinetic monitoring of NTG and its dinitrate metabolites indicated that concentrations were well within therapeutic levels observed in humans. Our studies indicate that clinically relevant concentrations of NTG not only altered ECM matrix by changing the expression of multiple genes that govern cellular integrity, affecting cellular MMP-9/TIMP-1 balance in THP-1 human macrophages possibly via NF-κB activation, but also led to systemic changes in MMP-9/TIMP-1 expression and gelatinase activity in rats. These effects may contribute to extracellular matrix degradation and possible atherosclerotic plaque destabilization.<newchar><newabs>23982954<newchar>15-Lipoxygenase/15-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15-LO/15-HETE) is known to modulate pulmonary vascular medial hypertrophy and intimal endothelial cells migration and angiogenesis after hypoxia. However, it is unclear whether 15-HETE affects the adventitia of the pulmonary arterial wall. We performed immunohistochemistry, adventitia fibrosis, pulmonary artery fibroblasts phenotype and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition to determine the role of 15-HETE in hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular adventitia remodeling. Our studies showed that O2 deprivation induced adventitia hypertrophy of pulmonary arteries with ECM accumulation in both humans with pulmonary arterial hypertension and hypoxic rats. Hypoxia induced 15-LO expression in adventitia. With the inhibitor, NDGA depressed the hypoxia induced ECM deposition and 15-LO production in hypoxic rats. Hypoxia up-regulated the expression of α-SMA, type-Ia collagen and fibronectin in cultured fibroblasts, which seemed to be due to the increased 15-LO/15-HETE. Exogenous 15-HETE mediated the ECM and phenotypic alterations of the fibroblasts as well. The 15-LO/15-HETE induced adventitia fibrosis and fibroblasts phenotypic alterations depended on signaling of the transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1)/Smad2/3 pathway. P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPKs) was likely to mediate 15-LO induced TGF-β1 and Smad2/3 activation after hypoxia. The results suggest that adventitia fibrosis is an important event in the hypoxia induced pulmonary arterial remodeling, which relies on 15-LO/15-HETE induced p38 MAPK-dependent TGF-β1/Smad2/3 intracellular signaling systems.<newchar><newabs>25698348<newchar>Allergic asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways characterized by excessive eosinophilic and lymphocytic inflammation with associated changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) resulting in airway wall remodeling. Hyaluronan (HA) is a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan ECM component that functions as a structural cushion in its high molecular mass (HMM) but has been implicated in metastasis and other disease processes when it is degraded to smaller fragments. However, relatively little is known about the role HA in mediating inflammatory responses in allergy and asthma. In the present study, we used a murine Aspergillus fumigatus inhalational model to mimic human disease. After observing in vivo that a robust B cell recruitment followed a massive eosinophilic egress to the lumen of the allergic lung and corresponded with the detection of low molecular mass HA (LMM HA), we examined the effect of HA on B cell chemotaxis and cytokine production in the ex vivo studies. We found that LMM HA functioned through a CD44-mediated mechanism to elicit chemotaxis of B lymphocytes, while high molecular mass HA (HMM HA) had little effect. LMM HA, but not HMM HA, also elicited the production of IL-10 and TGF-β1 in these cells. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a critical role for ECM components in mediating leukocyte migration and function which are critical to the maintenance of allergic inflammatory responses.<newchar>Aspergillus fumigatus<n-term>B lymphocytes<n-term>Hyaluronan<n-term><newabs>22692230<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an essential role in organizing tissues, defining their shapes or in presenting growth factors. Their components have been well described in most species, but our understanding of the mechanisms that control ECM remodeling remains limited. Likewise, how the ECM contributes to cellular mechanical responses has been examined in few cases. Here, I review how studies performed in C. elegans have brought several significant advances on those topics. Focusing only on epithelial cells, I discuss basement membrane invasion by the anchor cell during vulva morphogenesis, a process that has greatly expanded our knowledge of ECM remodeling in vivo. I then discuss the ECM role in a novel mechanotransduction process, whereby muscle contractions stimulate the remodeling of hemidesmosome-like junctions in the epidermis, which highlights that these junctions are mechanosensitive. Finally, I discuss progress in defining the composition and potential roles of the apical ECM covering epidermal cells in embryos.<newchar><newabs>26224753<newchar>Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is prevalent in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Emerging studies suggest that epigenetic mechanisms contribute to the development and progression of fibrosis in CKD. HHcy and its intermediates are known to alter the DNA methylation pattern, which is a critical regulator of epigenetic information. In this study, we hypothesized that HHcy causes renovascular remodeling by DNA hypermethylation, leading to glomerulosclerosis. We also evaluated whether the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) could modulate extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism and reduce renovascular fibrosis. C57BL/6J (wild-type) and cystathionine-β-synthase (CBS(+/-)) mice, treated without or with 5-Aza (0.5 mg/kg body weight, i.p.), were used. CBS(+/-) mice showed high plasma Hcy levels, hypertension, and significant glomerular and arteriolar injury. 5-Aza treatment normalized blood pressure and reversed renal injury. CBS(+/-) mice showed global hypermethylation and up-regulation of DNA methyltransferase-1 and -3a. Methylation-specific PCR showed an imbalance between matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 and -2 and also increased collagen and galectin-3 expression. 5-Aza reduced abnormal DNA methylation and restored the MMP-9/TIMP-1, -2 balance. In conclusion, our data suggest that during HHcy, abnormal DNA methylation and an imbalance between MMP-9 and TIMP-1 and -2 lead to ECM remodeling and renal fibrosis.<newchar>5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine<n-term>epigenetics<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>renal fibrosis<n-term><newabs>23698816<newchar>Collective cell behaviors in migration and force generation were studied at the mesoscopic-level using cells grown in a 3D extracellular matrix (ECM) simulating tissues. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was applied to investigate dynamic cell mechanics at this level. MDCK, NBT2, and MEF cells were embedded in 3D ECM, forming clusters that then migrated and generated forces affecting the ECM. The cells demonstrated MRI contrast due to iron accumulation in the clusters. Timelapse-MRI enabled the measurement of dynamic stress fields generated by the cells, as well as simultaneous monitoring of the cell distribution and ECM deformation/remodeling. We found cell clusters embedded in the 3D ECM can exert translational forces to pull and push, as well as torque, their surroundings. We also observed that the sum of forces generated by multiple cell clusters may result in macroscopic deformation. In summary, MRI can be used to image cell-ECM interactions mesoscopically.<newchar><newabs>25840998<newchar>Alterations in extracellular matrix (ECM) have been implicated in the pathophysiology of pulmonary hypertension. Here, we have undertaken a compartment-specific study to elucidate the expression profile of collagens and their processing enzymes in donor and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) pulmonary arteries. Predominant intimal, but also medial and perivascular, remodeling and reduced lumen diameter were detected in IPAH pulmonary arteries. Two-photon microscopy demonstrated accumulation of collagen fibers. Quantification of collagen in pulmonary arteries revealed collagen accumulation mainly in the intima of IPAH pulmonary arteries compared with donors. Laser capture-microdissected pulmonary artery profiles (intima+media and perivascular tissue) were analyzed by real-time PCR for ECM gene expression. In the intima+media of IPAH vessels, collagens (COL4A5, COL14A1, and COL18A1), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 19, and a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM) 33 were higher expressed, whereas MMP10, ADAM17, TIMP1, and TIMP3 were less abundant. Localization of COLXVIII, its cleavage product endostatin, and MMP10, ADAM33, and TIMP1 was confirmed in pulmonary arteries by immunohistochemistry. ELISA for collagen XVIII/endostatin demonstrated significantly elevated plasma levels in IPAH patients compared with donors, whereas circulating MMP10, ADAM33, and TIMP1 levels were similar between the two groups. Endostatin levels were correlated with pulmonary arterial wedge pressure, and established prognostic markers of IPAH, right atrial pressure, cardiac index, 6-min walking distance, NH2-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, and uric acid. Expression of unstudied collagens, MMPs, ADAMs, and TIMPs were found to be significantly altered in IPAH intima+media. Elevated levels of circulating collagen XVIII/endostatin are associated with markers of a poor prognosis.<newchar>collagen XVIII<n-term>endostatin<n-term>laser microdissection<n-term>vascular fibrosis<n-term>vascular remodeling<n-term><newabs>23494144<newchar>Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels sprouting from existing ones, occurs in several situations like wound healing, tissue remodeling, and near growing tumors. Under hypoxic conditions, tumor cells secrete growth factors, including VEGF. VEGF activates endothelial cells (ECs) in nearby vessels, leading to the migration of ECs out of the vessel and the formation of growing sprouts. A key process in angiogenesis is cellular self-organization, and previous modeling studies have identified mechanisms for producing networks and sprouts. Most theoretical studies of cellular self-organization during angiogenesis have ignored the interactions of ECs with the extra-cellular matrix (ECM), the jelly or hard materials that cells live in. Apart from providing structural support to cells, the ECM may play a key role in the coordination of cellular motility during angiogenesis. For example, by modifying the ECM, ECs can affect the motility of other ECs, long after they have left. Here, we present an explorative study of the cellular self-organization resulting from such ECM-coordinated cell migration. We show that a set of biologically-motivated, cell behavioral rules, including chemotaxis, haptotaxis, haptokinesis, and ECM-guided proliferation suffice for forming sprouts and branching vascular trees.<newchar><newabs>22972510<newchar>It is a widely held belief that the sole effect of muscle on bone is through mechanical loading. However, as the two tissues are intimately associated, we hypothesized that muscle myokines may have positive effects on bone. We found that factors produced by muscle will protect osteocytes from undergoing cell death induced by dexamethasone (dex), a glucocorticoid known to induce osteocyte apoptosis thereby compromising their capacity to regulate bone remodeling. Both the trypan blue exclusion assay for cell death and nuclear fragmentation assay for apoptosis were used. MLO-Y4 osteocytes, primary osteocytes, and MC3T3 osteoblastic cells were protected against dex-induced apoptosis by C2C12 myotube conditioned media (MT-CM) or by CM from ex vivo electrically stimulated, intact extensor digitorum longus (EDL) or soleus muscle derived from 4 month-old mice. C2C12 MT-CM, but not undifferentiated myoblast CM prevented dex-induced cell apoptosis and was potent down to 0.1 % CM. The CM from EDL muscle electrically stimulated tetanically at 80 Hz was more potent (10 fold) in prevention of dex-induced osteocyte death than CM from soleus muscle stimulated at the same frequency or CM from EDL stimulated at 1 Hz. This suggests that electrical stimulation increases production of factors that preserve osteocyte viability and that type II fibers are greater producers than type I fibers. The muscle factor(s) appears to protect osteocytes from cell death through activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, as MT-CM induces β-catenin nuclear translocation and β-catenin siRNA abrogated the positive effects of MT-CM on dex-induced apoptosis. We conclude that muscle cells naturally secrete factor(s) that preserve osteocyte viability.<newchar><newabs>24293148<newchar>Platelet-rich plasma is widely used in acute and chronic ulcers due to its capacity to enhance the wound healing process. Fibroblasts are believed to be the most important cells in the production and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 is the proteolytic enzyme of collagen I, and has a key role in collagen remodeling during wound healing. Whether or not platelet-rich clot releasate (PRCR) is able to effectively modulate the ECM, and the effect of PRCR on the expression of type I collagen and MMP-1 in human dermal fibroblasts was evaluated. Specifically, human adult dermal fibroblasts were incubated in PRCR-containing solutions for 24 and 48 h, after which the levels of collagen and MMP-1 were quantified by reverse transcription PCR at the transcriptional level, and ELISA and immunoblot analyses at the post-transcriptional level. PRCR markedly up-regulated the expression of MMP-1 and type I collagen in fibroblasts incubated in 20 % PRCR solutions for 48 h. These findings suggest that increased MMP-1 expression after PRCR treatment enable remodeling the ECM.<newchar><newabs>21540992<newchar>After onset of myocardial infarction (MI), the left ventricle (LV) undergoes a continuum of molecular, cellular, and extracellular responses that result in LV wall thinning, dilatation, and dysfunction. These dynamic changes in LV shape, size, and function are termed cardiac remodeling. If the cardiac healing after MI does not proceed properly, it could lead to cardiac rupture or maladaptive cardiac remodeling, such as further LV dilatation and dysfunction, and ultimately death. Although the precise molecular mechanisms in this cardiac healing process have not been fully elucidated, this process is strictly coordinated by the interaction of cells with their surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The components of ECM include basic structural proteins such as collagen, elastin and specialized proteins such as fibronectin, proteoglycans and matricellular proteins. Matricellular proteins are a class of non-structural and secreted proteins that probably exert regulatory functions through direct binding to cell surface receptors, other matrix proteins, and soluble extracellular factors such as growth factors and cytokines. This small group of proteins, which includes osteopontin, thrombospondin-1/2, tenascin, periostin, and secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine, shows a low level of expression in normal adult tissue, but is markedly upregulated during wound healing and tissue remodeling, including MI. In this review, we focus on the regulatory functions of matricellular proteins during cardiac tissue healing and remodeling after MI.<newchar>Cardiac healing<n-term>Cardiac remodeling<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Matricellular proteins<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term><newabs>26689914<newchar>The aim of this review is to discuss the potential usefulness of novel biochemical markers of connective tissues: neo-epitopes of extracellular matrix proteins generated by post-translational modifications by tissue proteinases. As each modification results from a specific local physiological or pathobiological process, the identification of specific proteinase-mediated cleavage products of tissue-specific proteins may produce a unique disease-specific biochemical marker. The authors present a novel interpretation of the process of tissue degradation described by neo-epitope fragments of the interstitial and basement membrane matrix in fibrotic disease, and the diagnostic and prognostic potential of such markers. Moreover, the authors highlight the importance of matrix protein fragments not only as markers of tissue remodeling, but also as players in tissue remodeling, due to their signaling properties.<newchar>ECM<n-term>Neo-epitope<n-term>biochemical marker<n-term>fibrosis<n-term><newabs>21797754<newchar>Pulmonary fibrosis refers to a group of lung diseases characterized by inflammation, fibroblast proliferation, and excessive collagen deposition. Although the mechanisms underlying pulmonary fibrosis are poorly understood, current evidence suggests that epithelial injury contributes to the development of fibrosis. Regenerative medicine approaches using extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds have been shown to promote site-specific tissue remodeling. This led to the hypothesis that particulate ECM would promote normal tissue repair and attenuate bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. C57BL/6 mice were treated intratracheally with bleomycin or saline with or without a particulate form of ECM scaffold from porcine urinary bladder matrix (UBM-ECM) or enzymatically digested UBM-ECM. Mice were sacrificed 5 and 14 days after exposure. Compared to control mice, bleomycin-exposed mice had similar increases in inflammation in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid regardless of UBM-ECM treatment. However, 14 days after exposure, lung histology and collagen levels revealed that mice treated with bleomycin and the particulate or digested UBM-ECM had negligible fibrosis, whereas mice given only bleomycin had marked fibrosis. Administration of the particulate UBM-ECM 24 h after bleomycin exposure also significantly protected against pulmonary injury. In vitro epithelial cell migration and wound healing assays revealed that particulate UBM-ECM promoted epithelial cell chemotaxis and migration. This suggests that promotion of epithelial wound repair may be one mechanism in which UBM-ECM limits pulmonary fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>24213878<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in maintaining the left ventricular geometry and ventricular function, and the inhibition of ECM remodeling has therapeutic benefits that could alleviate the progression of ventricular remodeling. Recent studies have indicated that lycopene has cardioprotective effects. In this study, a rat myocardial infarction (MI) model was established by left anterior descending coronary artery ligation. After the operation, the rats received lycopene or saline. After 28 days, the rats underwent echocardiography detection and were sacrificed. Myocardial fibrosis was observed by Masson staining. Type I collagen, MMP-9, and MAPK protein expression were detected in the ischemic zone surrounding the MI by western blot. Treatment with lycopene increased the EF from 45.2 ± 3.12 % to 51.1 ± 4.63, and it decreased the LVEDd from 6.52 ± 0.37 mm to 6.18 ± 0.41 mm and the LVESd from 4.29 ± 0.63 to 3.94 ± 0.37 at 28 days post-myocardial infarction. Lycopene attenuated the MI-induced increase in MMP-9 and type I collagen expression, and inhibited p38 activation. Moreover, lycopene decreased the collagen volume fraction in the peri-infarcted zone. The data indicated that lycopene improved the cardiac function and ventricular remodeling by inhibiting p38 activation and MMP-9 expression.<newchar><newabs>26176406<newchar>Paraoxanase-1 (PON1) is an HDL-associated enzyme that contributes to the antioxidant and antiatherosclerotic properties of HDL. Lack of PON1 results in dysfunctional HDL. HHcy is a risk factor for cardiovascular disorders, and instigates vascular dysfunction and ECM remodeling. Although studies have reported HHcy during atherosclerosis, the exact mechanism is unclear. Here, we hypothesize that dysfunctional HDL due to lack of PON1 contributes to endothelial impairment and atherogenesis through HHcy-induced ECM re-modeling. To verify this hypothesis, we used C57BL6/J and PON1 knockout mice (KO) and fed them an atherogenic diet. The expression of Akt, ADMA, and DDAH, as well as endothelial gap junction proteins such as Cx-37 and Cx-40 and eNOS was measured for vascular dysfunction and inflammation. We observed that cardiac function was decreased and plasma Hcy levels were increased in PON1 KO mice fed the atherogenic diet compared with the controls. Expression of Akt, eNOS, DDAH, Cx-37, and Cx-40 was decreased, and the expression of MMP-9 and ADMA was increased in PON1 KO mice fed an atherogenic diet compared with the controls. Our results suggest that HHcy plays an intricate role in dysfunctional HDL, owing to the lack of PON1. This contributes to vascular endothelial impairment and atherosclerosis through MMP-9-induced vascular remodeling.<newchar>Akt<n-term>Cx-37 and -40<n-term>MMP-9<n-term>atherosclerosis<n-term>athérosclérose<n-term>connexines 37 et 40<n-term>eNOS<n-term>homocysteine<n-term>homocystéine<n-term><newabs>12044918<newchar>Follicular formation, growth or atresia, and ovulation as well as luteal formation and subsequent regression are dependent upon cyclical remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The proteinaceous and nonproteinaceous components of the ECM provide the tissue specific, extracellular architecture to which cells attach. Furthermore, the ECM modulates cellular activities through cellular surface receptors and serves as a reservoir for specific growth factors, cytokines, and binding proteins. The ability of the ECM to direct the proliferation, differentiation and function of cells implicates ECM remodeling in normal ovarian function. Specific components of the ECM are cleaved by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) whose activities are specifically inhibited by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). MMPs are zinc- and calcium-dependent enzymes that collectively degrade proteinaceous components of the ECM. Controlled turnover of ECM by MMPs and TIMPs may be essential for creating and (or) preserving microenvironments conducive to follicular and luteal function and is likely dependent upon the ratio of enzyme to inhibitor. To date, most studies have focused upon correlating ovarian expression of MMPs and TIMPs with various stages of the reproductive cycle. From these studies, many potential key regulators of ovarian ECM remodeling have been identified. This review presents evidence for the involvement of MMPs and TIMPs in ECM remodeling associated with follicular and luteal function.<newchar><newabs>25663698<newchar>Integrin adhesion receptors connect the extracellular matrix (ECM) to the cytoskeleton and serve as bidirectional mechanotransducers. During development, angiogenesis, wound healing and cancer progression, the relative abundance of fibronectin receptors, including integrins α5β1 and αvβ3, changes, thus altering the integrin composition of cell-matrix adhesions. Here, we show that enhanced αvβ3 expression can fully compensate for loss of α5β1 and other β1 integrins to support outside-in and inside-out force transmission. α5β1 and αvβ3 each mediate actin cytoskeletal remodeling in response to stiffening or cyclic stretching of the ECM. Likewise, α5β1 and αvβ3 support cellular traction forces of comparable magnitudes and similarly increase these forces in response to ECM stiffening. However, cells using αvβ3 respond to lower stiffness ranges, reorganize their actin cytoskeleton more substantially in response to stretch, and show more randomly oriented traction forces. Centripetal traction force orientation requires long stress fibers that are formed through the action of Rho kinase (ROCK) and myosin II, and that are supported by α5β1. Thus, altering the relative abundance of fibronectin-binding integrins in cell-matrix adhesions affects the spatiotemporal organization of force transmission.<newchar>Actin cytoskeleton<n-term>Cell–matrix adhesion<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Mechanotransduction<n-term>ROCK<n-term>Rho kinase<n-term>Traction force<n-term>β1 integrin<n-term>β3 integrin<n-term><newabs>26610210<newchar>MicroRNAs (miRNAs) deregulation is frequent in human gastric cancers (GCs), but the role of specific miRNAs involved in this disease remains elusive. MiR-22 was previously reported to act as tumor suppressors or oncogenes in diverse cancers. However, their accurate expression, function and mechanism in GC are largely unclear. Here, we found that the expression of miR-22 was significantly reduced in clinical GC tissues compared with paired adjacent normal tissues, and was significantly correlated with a more aggressive phenotype of GC in patients, and miR-22 low expression correlated with poor overall survival. The introduction of miR-22 markedly suppressed GC cell growth, migration and invasion, and inhibition of miR-22 promoted GC cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro. We further demonstrated that miR-22 acted as tumor suppressors through targeting extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling member matrix metalloproteinase 14 (MMP14) and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) inducer Snail in GC. Moreover, ectopic expression of MMP14 or Snail restored inhibitory effects of miR-22 on cell migration and invasion in GC cells, and a negative relationship between the miR-22 expression and MMP14 or Snail mRNA levels was observed in GC. Finally, overexpression of miR-22 suppressed tumor growth, peritoneal dissemination and pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Taken together, we identified that miR-22 is a potent tumor suppressor in GC. MiR-22 downregulation promotes GC invasion and metastasis by upregulating MMP14 and Snail, and then inducing ECM remodeling and EMT. These findings provide a better understanding of the development and progression of GC and may be an important implication for future therapy of the GC.<newchar><newabs>21330123<newchar>We studied patients with degenerative disc disease (DDD) to demonstrate that i) remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the intervertebral disc (IVD), particularly the elastic fiber system, of subjects with herniated discs is dysregulated and that ii) it is accompanied by accelerated elastin degradation due to increased expression of matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9). Moreover we wanted to obtain a deeper insight into the pathogenesis of DDD through the study of ECM calcification, DNA fragmentation using TUNEL analysis, BAX, bcl-2 and vimentin immunopositive cells. We studied herniated discs from patients of three age groups (group 1=30-40 years; group 2=40-50 years; and group 3=50-65 years) to evaluate the oxytalan fiber systemMMP-9, apoptosis and vimentin immunopositive cells. The results demonstrated the presence of oxytalan fibers in the annulus fibrosus (AF) and the nucleus pulposus (NP) of herniated discs. In the AF oxytalan fibers replaced disrupted mature elastic fibers in calcified areas, while in the NP they were mostly found in nests at the periphery of chondrocytes. MMP-9 was prevalently observed in NP nests above all in group 1 and group 3 discs while group 2 exhibited a lower MMP-9 immunostaining. Activation of the apoptotic process was demonstrated by upregulated BAX expression in group 3. BAX immunopositivity was inversely mirrored by a significant decrease in bcl-2 expression. Intermediate filament protein vimentin was strongly expressed only in group 1 samples. A large number of apoptotic TUNEL+ cells was observed in group 3 specimens. The presence of oxytalan fibers may be the result of a process of incomplete elastogenesis, or a response to mechanical stress trying to functionally replace the lack of elastic fibers. MMP-9 expression seems to relate to disc damage, while chondrocyte BAX upregulation and TUNEL+ cell staining revealed apoptosis activation regardless of patient age. Vimentin immunopositivity was clearly detected in group 1 annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus cells. In conclusion, as demonstrated by the vimentin-positive cells, the injured IVD has endogenous resources that can stem the DDD damage, including substitution of damaged elastic fibers by oxytalan fibers. In addition, induction of apoptosis suggests an increased cell turnover in response to repair needs.<newchar><newabs>19573532<newchar>Remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI) associates with left ventricular (LV) dilation, decreased cardiac function and increased mortality. The dynamic synthesis and breakdown of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins play a significant role in myocardial remodeling post-MI. Expression of osteopontin (OPN) increases in the heart post-MI. Evidence has been provided that lack of OPN induces LV dilation which associates with decreased collagen synthesis and deposition. Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases, key players in ECM remodeling process post-MI, increased ECM deposition (fibrosis) and improved LV function in mice lacking OPN after MI. This review summarizes--1) signaling pathways leading to increased expression of OPN in the heart; 2) the alterations in the structure and function of the heart post-MI in mice lacking OPN; and 3) mechanisms involved in OPN-mediated ECM remodeling post-MI.<newchar><newabs>26042506<newchar>Reactive stromal changes that occur in different human cancers might play a role in local tumor spreading and progression. Studies done on various human cancers have shown activated stromal cell phenotypes, modified extracellular matrix (ECM) composition, and increased microvessel density. Furthermore, they exhibit biological markers consistent with stroma at the site of wound repair. In prostate cancer, stroma is composed of fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, endothelial cells and immune cells. Predominant cells in the tumorous stroma are, however, fibroblasts/ myofibroblasts. They are responsible for the synthesis, deposition and remodeling of the ECM. Epithelial tumorous cells, in interaction with stromal cells and with the help of various molecules of ECM, create a microenvironment suitable for cancer cell proliferation, movement, and differentiation. In this review, we discussed the role of different stromal components in prostate cancer as well as their potential prognostic and therapeutic significance.<newchar><newabs>19780649<newchar>We have developed an efficient decellularization process for the isolation of extracellular matrix (ECM) from native cardiac tissue. The isolated ECM exhibited desirable mechanical properties in terms of elasticity, strength and durability-properties required from scaffolds used for cardiac tissue repair. This study further investigates the potential use of this scaffold for cardiac tissue engineering in terms of interactions with seeded cells and biocompatibility. We used the commonly studied fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes, and mesenchymal stem cells, which were isolated and seeded onto the scaffold. Cell density and distribution were followed by 3,3'-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate staining, and their proliferation and viability were assessed by AlamarBlue assay and fluorecein-diacetate/propidium iodide staining. Fibroblast-seeded scaffolds shrank to 1-2 mm(3) spheroids, and their glycosaminoglycans significantly increased by 23%. The expression of ECM remodeling-related mRNAs of collagens I and III, matrix metalloproteinase 2, and type 1 tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases was quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction, and was found significantly elevated in fibroblast-seeded scaffold, compared with the control cells on plates. Fibroblast-seeded scaffolds lost some flexibility, yet gained strength compared with the acellular scaffolds, as shown by mechanical testing. Scaffold seeded with cardiomyocyte began to beat in concert few days after seeding, and the myocytes expressed typical functional cardiac markers such as alpha-actinin, troponin I, and connexin43. The cells revealed aligned elongated morphology, as presented by immunofluorescent staining and scanning electron microscopy. Mesenchymal stem cell-seeded scaffolds maintained viability over 24 days in culture. These findings further strengthen the potential use of acellular cardiac ECM as a biomaterial for heart regeneration.<newchar><newabs>21338346<newchar>During amphibian metamorphosis, the animal body dramatically remodels to adapt from the aquatic to the terrestrial life. Cell death of larval organs/tissues occurs massively in balance with proliferation of adult organs/tissues, to ensure survival of the individuals. Thus, amphibian metamorphosis provides a unique and valuable opportunity to study regulatory mechanisms of cell death. The advantage of this animal model is the absolute dependence of amphibian metamorphosis on thyroid hormone (TH). Since the 1990s, a number of TH response genes have been identified in several organs of Xenopus laevis tadpoles such as the tail and the intestine by subtractive hybridization and more recently by cDNA microarrays. Their expression and functional analyses, which are still ongoing, have shed light on molecular mechanisms of TH-induced cell death during amphibian metamorphosis. In this review, I survey the recent progress of research in this field, focusing on the X. laevis intestine where apoptotic process is well characterized at the cellular level and can be easily manipulated in vitro. A growing body of evidence indicates that apoptosis during the intestinal remodeling occurs not only via a cell-autonomous pathway but also via cell-cell and/or cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. Especially, stromelysin-3, a matrix metalloproteinase, has been shown to alter cell-ECM interactions by cleaving a laminin receptor and induce apoptosis in the larval intestinal epithelium. Here, I emphasize the importance of TH-induced multiple apoptotic pathways for massive and well-organized apoptosis in the amphibian organs and discuss their conservation in the mammalian organs.<newchar><newabs>23844732<newchar>Following myocardial infarction (MI), a dynamic and complex process called wound healing is initiated, aiming to produce a robust scar and limit adverse remodeling of the left ventricle (LV). Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) - the most populous cardiac cell-type - differentiate into myofibroblasts under the influence of post-MI mechanical stress, transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) and various inflammatory signals. Myofibroblasts are contractile cells that start producing extracellular matrix (ECM) components and secrete factors that orchestrate wound healing, but also promote adverse cardiac remodeling that can progress to life-threatening heart failure (HF). Due to their vital role in the wound healing and LV remodeling after MI, (myo)fibroblasts have been receiving more and more attention lately as targets for anti-HF treatment strategies. In this review, we will summarize the current knowledge regarding the cardiac (myo)fibroblast characteristics, discuss the signaling pathways and the factors that affect their migration, proliferation and differentiation post-MI, as well as their ECM-depositing capabilities. Finally, we will provide an overview of the latest innovative research that is targeting the (myo)fibroblast, in an attempt to limit adverse remodeling and prevent HF.<newchar><newabs>23994172<newchar>Matrix gla protein (MGP), a potent inhibitor of extracellular matrix (ECM) mineralization, is primarily produced by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and chondrocytes. Consistent with its expression profile, MGP deficiency in mice (Mgp-/- mice) results in extensive mineralization of all arteries and cartilaginous ECMs. Interestingly, we observed a progressive loss of body weight in Mgp-/- mice, which becomes apparent by the third week of age. Taking into account the new paradigm linking the metabolic regulators of energy metabolism and body mass to that of bone remodeling, we compared the bone volume in Mgp-/- mice to that of their wild type littermates by micro-CT and bone histomorphometry. We found a decrease of bone volume over tissue volume in Mgp-/- mice caused by an impaired osteoblast function. In culture, early differentiation of Mgp-/- primary osteoblasts was not affected; however there was a significant upregulation of the late osteogenic marker Bglap (osteocalcin). We examined whether the prevention of arterial calcification in Mgp-/- mice could correct the low bone mass phenotype. The bones of two different genetic models: Mgp-/-;SM22-Mgp and Mgp-/-;Eln+/- mice were analyzed. In the former strain, vascular calcification was fully rescued by transgenic overexpression of Mgp in the VSMCs, while in the latter, elastin haploinsufficiency significantly impeded the deposition of minerals in the arterial walls. In both models, the low mass phenotype seen in Mgp-/- mice was rescued. Our data support the hypothesis that the arterial calcification, not MGP deficiency itself, causes the low bone mass phenotype in Mgp-/- mice. Taken together, we provide evidence that arterial calcification affects bone remodeling and pave the way for further mechanistic studies to identify the pathway(s) regulating this process.<newchar>BFR/BS<n-term>BMD<n-term>BV/TV<n-term>Bone remodeling<n-term>ECM<n-term>ESRD<n-term>Eln<n-term>MAR<n-term>MGP<n-term>Matrix gla protein (MGP)<n-term>Ob/B.Pm<n-term>Ob/T.Ar<n-term>Oc/B.Pm<n-term>TB<n-term>TRAP<n-term>Toluidine blue<n-term>VKVG<n-term>VSMCs<n-term>Vascular calcification<n-term>bone formation rate over bone surface<n-term>bone mineral density<n-term>bone volume over tissue volume<n-term>elastin<n-term>end-stage renal disease<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix gla protein<n-term>mineral apposition rate<n-term>osteoblasts per bone perimeter<n-term>osteoblasts per tissue area<n-term>osteoclasts per bone perimeter<n-term>osteoclasts per tissue area<n-term>tartrate resistant acid phosphatase<n-term>vascular smooth muscle cells<n-term>von Kossa and van Gieson<n-term><newabs>20656375<newchar>Invadopodia are specialized actin-rich protrusions of metastatic tumor and transformed cells with crucial functions in ECM degradation and invasion. Although early electron microscopy studies described invadopodia as long filament-like protrusions of the cell membrane adherent to the matrix, fluorescence microscopy studies have focused on invadopodia as actin-cortactin aggregates localized to areas of ECM degradation. The absence of a clear conceptual integration of these two descriptions of invadopodial structure has impeded understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that govern invadopodia. To determine the relationship between the membrane filaments identified by electron microscopy and the actin-cortactin aggregates of invadopodia, we applied rapid live-cell high-resolution TIRF microscopy to examine cell membrane dynamics at the cortactin core of the invadopodia of human carcinoma cells. We found that cortactin docking to the cell membrane adherent to 2D fibronectin matrix initiates invadopodium assembly associated with the formation of an invadopodial membrane process that extends from a ventral cell membrane lacuna toward the ECM. The tip of the invadopodial process flattens as it interacts with the 2D matrix, and it undergoes constant rapid ruffling and dynamic formation of filament-like protrusions as the invadopodium matures. To describe this newly discovered dynamic relationship between the actin-cortactin core and invadopodial membranes, we propose a model of the invadopodial complex. Using TIRF microscopy, we also established that - in striking contrast to the invadopodium - membrane at the podosome of a macrophage fails to form any process- or filament-like membrane protrusions. Thus, the undulation and ruffling of the invadopodial membrane together with the formation of dynamic filament-like extensions from the invadopodial cortactin core defines invadopodia as invasive superstructures that are distinct from the podosomes.<newchar><newabs>23792089<newchar>Vitamin D has received tremendous amount of attention recently due to the ever-increasing reports of association between vitamin D deficiency and a wide range of conditions, from cancer to fertility to longevity. The fascination of disease association with vitamin D deficiency comes from the relatively easy solution to overcome such a risk factor, that is, either by increase in sun exposure and/or diet supplementation. Many reviews have been written on a protective role of vitamin D in asthma and related morbidities; here, we will summarize the epidemiological evidence supporting a role of vitamin D against hallmark features of severe asthma, such as airway remodeling and asthma exacerbations. Furthermore, we discuss data from in vitro and in vivo studies which provide insights on the potential mechanisms of how vitamin D may protect against severe asthma pathogenesis and how vitamin D deficiency may lead to the development of severe asthma. Approximately 5-15% of asthmatic individuals suffer from the more severe forms of disease in spite of aggressive therapies and they are more likely to have irreversible airflow obstruction associated with airway remodeling. At present drugs commonly used to control asthma symptoms, such as corticosteroids, do not significantly reverse or reduce remodeling in the airways. Hence, if vitamin D plays a protective role against the development of severe asthma, then the most effective therapy may simply be a healthy dose of sunshine.<newchar>1,25(OH)(2)D(3)<n-term>1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)<n-term>25(OH)D(3)<n-term>25-hydroxyvitamin D(3)<n-term>ADAM metallopeptidase domain 33<n-term>ADAM33<n-term>ASM<n-term>Airway remodeling<n-term>CRTAM<n-term>CXCL12<n-term>CXCR4<n-term>ECM<n-term>Exacerbation<n-term>FOXP3<n-term>I-kappa B alpha<n-term>IFN-β<n-term>IL<n-term>IkBα<n-term>MMP9<n-term>PBMC<n-term>PDGF<n-term>RSV<n-term>RXR<n-term>RelA<n-term>SNP<n-term>STRA<n-term>Severe asthma<n-term>Steroid resistance<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>Treg<n-term>VDR<n-term>VDRE<n-term>Vitamin D<n-term>airway smooth muscle<n-term>chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12<n-term>chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4<n-term>class I major histocompatibility complex-restricted T cell-associated molecule<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>forkhead box P3<n-term>interferon-β<n-term>interleukin<n-term>metalloproteinease 9<n-term>peripheral blood mononuclear cell<n-term>platelet-derived growth factor<n-term>regulatory T cell<n-term>respiratory syncytial virus<n-term>retinoid-X-receptor<n-term>severe treatment-resistant asthma<n-term>single nucleotide polymorphism<n-term>transforming growth factor β1<n-term>v-rel avian reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene homolog A<n-term>vitamin D receptor<n-term>vitamin D response element<n-term><newabs>22285947<newchar>Aging is characterized by reduced tissue and organ function, regenerative capacity, and accompanied by a decrease in tissue resident stem cell numbers and a loss of potency. The impact of aging on stem cell populations differs between tissues and depends on a number of non cell-intrinsic factors, including systemic changes associated with immune system alterations, as well as senescence related changes of the local cytoarchitecture. The latter has been studied in the context of environmental niche properties required for stem cell maintenance. Here, we will discuss the impact of the extracellular matrix (ECM) on stem cell maintenance, its changes during aging and its significance for stem cell therapy. We provide an overview on ECM components and examples of age associated remodeling of the cytoarchitecture. The interaction of stem cells with the ECM will be described and the importance of an intact and hospitable ECM for stem cell maintenance, differentiation and stem cell initiated tissue repair outlined. It is concluded that a remodeled ECM due to age related inflammation, fibrosis or oxidative stress provides an inadequate environment for endogenous regeneration or stem cell therapies. Means to provide adequate ECM for stem cell therapies and endogenous regeneration and the potential of antioxidants to prevent ECM damage and promote its repair and subsequently support regeneration are discussed.<newchar><newabs>15922361<newchar>An in vivo study was conducted to determine if an extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold co-localized with autologous muscle tissue could achieve constructive remodeling of esophageal tissue without stricture. ECM derived from the porcine urinary bladder was processed, decellularized, configured into a tube shape, and terminally sterilized for use as a bioscaffold for esophageal reconstruction in a dog model. Twenty-two dogs were divided into four groups, three groups of five and one group of seven. Groups 1 and 2 were repaired with either ECM alone or muscle tissue alone, respectively. Groups 3 and 4 were repaired with ECM plus either a partial (30%) covering with muscle tissue or a complete (100%) covering with muscle tissue, respectively. Animals in groups 1 and 2 were sacrificed within approximately 3 weeks because of the formation of intractable esophageal stricture. Four of five dogs in group 3 and six of seven dogs in group 4 were survived for 26 days to 230 days and showed constructive remodeling of esophageal tissue with the formation of well organized esophageal tissue layers, minimal stricture, esophageal motility, and a normal clinical outcome. Mechanical testing of a subset of the remodeled esophageal tissue from animals in groups 3 and 4 showed progressive remodeling from a relatively stiff, non-compliant ECM tube structure toward a tissue with near normal biomechanical properties. We conclude that ECM bioscaffolds plus autologous muscle tissue, but not ECM scaffolds or muscle tissue alone, can facilitate the in situ reconstitution of structurally and functionally acceptable esophageal tissue.<newchar><newabs>24933343<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is a non-rheumatoid joint disease characterized by progressive degeneration of extra-cellular cartilage matrix (ECM), enhanced subchondral bone remodeling, osteophyte formation and synovial thickening. Alendronate (ALN) is a potent inhibitor of osteoclastic bone resorption and results in reduced bone remodeling. This study investigated the effects of pre-emptive use of ALN on OA related osteoclastic subchondral bone resorption in an in vivo rat model for severe OA. Using multi-modality imaging we measured effects of ALN treatment within cartilage and synovium. Severe osteoarthritis was induced in left rat knees using papain injections in combination with a moderate running protocol. Twenty rats were treated with subcutaneous ALN injections and compared to twenty untreated controls. Animals were longitudinally monitored for 12weeks with in vivo μCT to measure subchondral bone changes and SPECT/CT to determine synovial macrophage activation using a folate-based radiotracer. Articular cartilage was analyzed at 6 and 12weeks with ex vivo contrast enhanced μCT and histology to measure sulfated-glycosaminoglycan (sGAG) content and cartilage thickness. ALN treatment successfully inhibited subchondral bone remodeling. As a result we found less subchondral plate porosity and reduced osteophytosis. ALN treatment did not reduce subchondral sclerosis. However, after the OA induction phase, ALN treatment protected cartilage ECM from degradation and reduced synovial macrophage activation. Surprisingly, ALN treatment also improved sGAG content of tibia cartilage in healthy joints. Our data was consistent with the hypothesis that osteoclastic bone resorption might play an important role in OA and may be a driving force for progression of the disease. However, our study suggest that this effect might not solely be effects on osteoclastic activity, since ALN treatment also influenced macrophage functioning. Additionally, ALN treatment and physical activity exercised a positive effect in healthy control joints, which increased cartilage sGAG content. More research on this topic might lead to novel insights as to improve cartilage quality.<newchar>Alendronate<n-term>Articular cartilage<n-term>Exercise<n-term>Osteoarthritis<n-term>Osteoclast<n-term>Subchondral bone<n-term><newabs>22897585<newchar>Breast cancer patients diagnosed within five years following pregnancy have increased metastasis and decreased survival. A hallmark of postpartum biology that may contribute to this poor prognosis is mammary gland involution, involving massive epithelial cell death and dramatic stromal remodeling. Previous studies show pro-tumorigenic properties of extracellular matrix (ECM) isolated from rodent mammary glands undergoing postpartum involution. More recent work demonstrates systemic ibuprofen treatment during involution decreases its tumor-promotional nature. Utilizing a proteomics approach, we identified relative differences in the composition of mammary ECM isolated from nulliparous rats and those undergoing postpartum involution, with and without ibuprofen treatment. GeLC-MS/MS experiments resulted in 20327 peptide identifications that mapped to 884 proteins with a &lt;0.02% false discovery rate. Label-free quantification yielded several ECM differences between nulliparous and involuting glands related to collagen-fiber organization, cell motility and attachment, and cytokine regulation. Increases in known pro-tumorigenic ECM proteins osteopontin, tenascin-C, and laminin-α1 and pro-inflammatory proteins STAT3 and CD68 further identify candidate mediators of breast cancer progression specific to the involution window. With postpartum ibuprofen treatment, decreases in tenascin-C and three laminin chains were revealed. Our data suggest novel ECM mediators of breast cancer progression and demonstrate a protective influence of ibuprofen on mammary ECM composition.<newchar><newabs>25622911<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a crucial role in irreversible remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in normal homeostasis and pathological states. Accumulating data from various studies strongly suggest that MMPs are tightly regulated, starting from the level of gene expression all the way to zymogen activation and endogenous inhibition, with each level controlled by multiple factors. Recent in vivo findings indicate that cell-ECM and cell-cell interactions, as well as ECM bio-active products, contribute an additional layer of regulation at all levels, indicating that individual MMP expression and activity in vivo are highly coordinated and tissue specific processes.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Regulation<n-term><newabs>25725472<newchar>Bone grafting or bone substitute is typically used to bridge a bone defect that has been caused by trauma, tumor resection, pathological degeneration, or congenital deformations. However, bone graft healing and remodeling is always a major concern of orthopedic surgeons. Because the periosteum has a remarkable regenerative capacity and is widely recognized to be essential for the initiation of bone graft healing and remodeling, the present study aimed to produce a rabbit decellularized periosteum (D-periosteum) to be used as a biologic scaffold for future bone tissue engineering. We obtained the D-periosteum by employing a combination of commonly used decellularization processes, which include physical methods as well as chemical and enzymatic solutions. The cellular components were effectively removed, and this removal was demonstrated using current decellularization criteria (H&amp;E staining, DAPI staining, DNA quantification and agarose gel electrophoresis); however, there were no significant alterations of the native extracellular matrix (ECM) properties (collagen, glycosaminoglycan (GAG), microarchitecture and mechanical properties). Periosteum-derived cells (PDCs) could adhere, proliferate and infiltrate into the D-periosteum in vitro. The allogenic D-periosteum was implanted subcutaneously into the backs of rabbits over 28 days to study the biocompatibility in vivo. The D-periosteum did not elicit a severe immunogenic response. In summary, a biologic scaffold composed of ECM from periosteum has been successfully developed. The D-periosteum maintains biocompatibility in vitro and in vivo and, therefore, can provide a naturally compatible scaffold for use in future bone tissue engineering.<newchar>Bone tissue engineering<n-term>Decellularization<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Periosteum<n-term><newabs>21549745<newchar>The main physiological function of the lymphatic vasculature is to maintain tissue fluid homeostasis. Lymphangiogenesis or de novo lymphatic formation is closely associated with tissue inflammation in adults (i.e. wound healing, allograft rejection, tumor metastasis). Until recently, research on lymphangiogenesis focused mainly on growth factor/growth factor-receptor pathways governing this process. One of the lymphatic vessel features is the incomplete or absence of basement membrane. This close association of endothelial cells with the underlying interstitial matrix suggests that cell-matrix interactions play an important role in lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic functions. However, the exploration of interaction between extracellular matrix (ECM) components and lymphatic endothelial cells is in its infancy. Herein, we describe ECM-cell and cell-cell interactions on lymphatic system function and their modification occurring in pathologies including cancer metastasis.<newchar><newabs>23885343<newchar>Muscle extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in maintaining muscular integrity and force transduction. However, the role of ECM in skeletal muscle atrophy remains unknown. In this study, we employed two clinically relevant mouse models of Achillotenotomy and hindlimb suspension to simulate Achilles tendon rupture and hindlimb disuse. The gastrocnemius was harvested following two weeks of treatment. We hypothesized that degradation of muscle ECM basement membrane lead to dysfunction of muscle contractility. Our results demonstrated a significant reduction of gastrocnemius single twitch force, isometric tetanic force, and contraction velocity following tendon rupture (p&lt;0.001), but not disuse. Additionally, up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) was observed only after tendon rupture (p=0.00234). These findings suggest that ECM remodeling and basement membrane degradation due to MMP-2 may be responsible for declined muscle contractibility. Inhibiting ECM degradation enzymes may be a potential treatment strategy for skeletal muscle atrophy after tendon rupture.<newchar>Achillotenotomy<n-term>basement membrane<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hindlimb suspension<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase-2<n-term>muscle atrophy<n-term><newabs>24996922<newchar>Cardiac and craniofacial developmental programs are intricately linked during early embryogenesis, which is also reflected by a high frequency of birth defects affecting both regions. The molecular nature of the crosstalk between mesoderm and neural crest progenitors and the involvement of endothelial cells within the cardio-craniofacial field are largely unclear. Here we show in the mouse that genetic ablation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (Flk1) in the mesoderm results in early embryonic lethality, severe deformation of the cardio-craniofacial field, lack of endothelial cells and a poorly formed vascular system. We provide evidence that endothelial cells are required for migration and survival of cranial neural crest cells and consequently for the deployment of second heart field progenitors into the cardiac outflow tract. Insights into the molecular mechanisms reveal marked reduction in Transforming growth factor beta 1 (Tgfb1) along with changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) composition. Our collective findings in both mouse and avian models suggest that endothelial cells coordinate cardio-craniofacial morphogenesis, in part via a conserved signaling circuit regulating ECM remodeling by Tgfb1.<newchar>ECM<n-term>Endothelial cell<n-term>Neural crest<n-term>Second heart field<n-term><newabs>25766108<newchar>Quiescin sulfhydryl oxidase 1 (QSOX1) is a flavoenzyme largely present in the extracellular milieu whose physiological functions and substrates are not known. QSOX1 has been implicated in the regulation of tumor cell survival, proliferation and migration, in addition to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. However, data regarding other pathophysiological conditions are still lacking. Arterial injury by balloon catheter is an established model of post-angioplasty restenosis. This technique induces neointima formation due to migration and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), followed by ECM synthesis and remodeling. Here, we show that QSOX1 knockdown inhibited VSMC migration and proliferation in vitro. In contrast, QSOX1 overexpression stimulated these processes. While migration could be induced by the incubation of cells with the active recombinant QSOX1, proliferation was induced by addition of the active and also of an inactive mutant QSOX1 protein. The proliferation induced by both recombinants was independent of intracellular hydrogen peroxide and dependent of the MEK/ERK pathway. To recapitulate in vivo VSMC pathophysiology, balloon-induced arterial injury was performed. The expression of QSOX1 in the neointimal layer of balloon-injured rat carotids was high and peaked at 14 days post-injury. In vivo QSOX1 knockdown led to a significant decrease in PCNA expression at day 14 post-injury and a decreased intima/media area ratio at day 21 post-injury, compared with scrambled siRNA transfection. In summary, our findings demonstrate that QSOX1 induces VSMC migration and proliferation in vitro and contributes to neointima thickening in balloon-injured rat carotids.<newchar>Cell migration<n-term>Cell proliferation<n-term>Neointima<n-term>Quiescin sulfhydryl oxidase<n-term>Vascular smooth muscle cell<n-term><newabs>26524536<newchar>The generation of functional, vascularized tissues is a key challenge for both tissue engineering applications and the development of advanced in vitro models analyzing interactions among circulating cells, endothelium and organ-specific microenvironments. Since vascularization is a complex process guided by multiple synergic factors, it is critical to analyze the specific role that different experimental parameters play in the generation of physiological tissues. Our goals were to design a novel meso-scale model bridging the gap between microfluidic and macro-scale studies, and high-throughput screen the effects of multiple variables on the vascularization of bone-mimicking tissues. We investigated the influence of endothelial cell (EC) density (3-5 Mcells/ml), cell ratio among ECs, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and osteo-differentiated MSCs (1:1:0, 10:1:0, 10:1:1), culture medium (endothelial, endothelial + angiopoietin-1, 1:1 endothelial/osteo), hydrogel type (100%fibrin, 60%fibrin+40%collagen), tissue geometry (2 × 2 × 2, 2 × 2 × 5 mm(3)). We optimized the geometry and oxygen gradient inside hydrogels through computational simulations and we analyzed microvascular network features including total network length/area and vascular branch number/length. Particularly, we employed the &quot;Design of Experiment&quot; statistical approach to identify key differences among experimental conditions. We combined the generation of 3D functional tissue units with the fine control over the local microenvironment (e.g. oxygen gradients), and developed an effective strategy to enable the high-throughput screening of multiple experimental parameters. Our approach allowed to identify synergic correlations among critical parameters driving microvascular network development within a bone-mimicking environment and could be translated to any vascularized tissue.<newchar>Bone-mimicking<n-term>Computational simulation<n-term>Design of experiment<n-term>ECM remodeling<n-term>Microvascular networks<n-term>Oxygen distribution<n-term><newabs>25741617<newchar>Cancer progression (initiation, growth, invasion and metastasis) occurs through interactions between malignant cells and the surrounding tumor stromal cells. The tumor microenvironment is comprised of a variety of cell types, such as fibroblasts, immune cells, vascular endothelial cells, pericytes and bone-marrow-derived cells, embedded in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have a pro-tumorigenic role through the secretion of soluble factors, angiogenesis and ECM remodeling. The experimental models for cancer cell survival, proliferation, migration, and invasion have mostly relied on two-dimensional monocellular and monolayer tissue cultures or Boyden chamber assays. However, these experiments do not precisely reflect the physiological or pathological conditions in a diseased organ. To gain a better understanding of tumor stromal or tumor matrix interactions, multicellular and three-dimensional cultures provide more powerful tools for investigating intercellular communication and ECM-dependent modulation of cancer cell behavior. As a platform for this type of study, we present an experimental model in which cancer cells are cultured on collagen gels embedded with primary cultures of CAFs.<newchar><newabs>15618318<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides the principal means by which mechanical information is communicated between tissue and cellular levels of function. These mechanical signals play a central role in controlling cell fate and establishing tissue structure and function. However, little is known regarding the mechanisms by which specific structural and mechanical properties of the ECM influence its interaction with cells, especially within a tissuelike context. This lack of knowledge precludes formulation of biomimetic microenvironments for effective tissue repair and replacement. The present study determined the role of collagen fibril density in regulating local cell-ECM biomechanics and fundamental fibroblast behavior. The model system consisted of fibroblasts seeded within collagen ECMs with controlled microstructure. Confocal microscopy was used to collect multidimensional images of both ECM microstructure and specific cellular characteristics. From these images temporal changes in three-dimensional cell morphology, time- and space-dependent changes in the three-dimensional local strain state of a cell and its ECM, and spatial distribution of beta1-integrin were quantified. Results showed that fibroblasts grown within high-fibril-density ECMs had decreased length-to-height ratios, increased surface areas, and a greater number of projections. Furthermore, fibroblasts within low-fibril-density ECMs reorganized their ECM to a greater extent, and it appeared that beta1-integrin localization was related to local strain and ECM remodeling events. Finally, fibroblast proliferation was enhanced in low-fibril-density ECMs. Collectively, these results are significant because they provide new insight into how specific physical properties of a cell's ECM microenvironment contribute to tissue remodeling events in vivo and to the design and engineering of functional tissue replacements.<newchar><newabs>20717629<newchar>Vascular remodeling is being recognized as a fundamental process during atherosclerosis and restenosis. Cumulative studies have demonstrated that extracellular matrix (ECM) degrading enzymes play a critical role during vascular remodeling. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) family is a recently identified metalloproteinase family which also has capacity to degrade ECM. ADAMTS family consists of 19 members and has been linked to a variety of physiological processes including development, angiogenesis, coagulation etc. Aberrant expression or function of ADAMTS members have been implicated to many disease states such as arthritis, cancer, thrombocytopenic purpura, but barely described with regard to cardiovascular disease. This review summarizes the recent advance with respect to the role of ADAMTS-7 in vascular remodeling. We review the structure, tissue distribution, substrate, expression and regulation of ADAMTS-7, especially highlight the fine tune by ADAMTS-7 of its substrate cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) in maintaining vascular homeostasis. By use of rat carotid artery balloon injury model to mimic vascular injury in vivo, we found that ADAMTS-7 protein was accumulated preferentially in neointima and mainly localized in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Adenovirus-elicited ADAMTS-7 overexpression greatly accelerated VSMCs migration and proliferation both in vivo and in vitro, and subsequently aggravated neointima thickening post-injury. Conversely, siRNA-mediated ADAMTS-7 knock down bona fide inhibited VSMCs migration and proliferation in cultured VSMCs and injured arteries, and ultimately ameliorated neointima area. Further studies demonstrated that ADAMTS-7 facilitated VSMCs migration through degradation of its substrate COMP. Moreover, we elucidated that COMP has the capacity to maintain the contractile phenotype of VSMCs through interacting with integrin alpha7beta1. ADAMTS-7 may therefore serve as a novel therapeutic target for atherosclerosis and postangioplasty restenosis.<newchar><newabs>25646088<newchar>Cell interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) can regulate multiple cellular activities and the matrix itself in dynamic, bidirectional processes. One such process is local proteolytic modification of the ECM. Invadopodia of tumor cells are actin-rich proteolytic protrusions that locally degrade matrix molecules and mediate invasion. We report that a novel high-density fibrillar collagen (HDFC) matrix is a potent inducer of invadopodia, both in carcinoma cell lines and in primary human fibroblasts. In carcinoma cells, HDFC matrix induced formation of invadopodia via a specific integrin signaling pathway that did not require growth factors or even altered gene and protein expression. In contrast, phosphoproteomics identified major changes in a complex phosphosignaling network with kindlin2 serine phosphorylation as a key regulatory element. This kindlin2-dependent signal transduction network was required for efficient induction of invadopodia on dense fibrillar collagen and for local degradation of collagen. This novel phosphosignaling mechanism regulates cell surface invadopodia via kindlin2 for local proteolytic remodeling of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>25575513<newchar>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive and usually lethal interstitial lung disease of unknown etiology characterized by aberrant activation of epithelial cells that induce the migration, proliferation and activation of fibroblasts. The resulting distinctive fibroblastic/myofibroblastic foci are responsible for the excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) production and abnormal lung remodeling. We have recently found that matrix metalloproteinase 19 (MMP-19)-deficient (Mmp19-/-) mice develop an exaggerated bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis, but the mechanisms are unclear. In this study, we explored the effect of MMP-19 deficiency on fibroblast gene expression and cell behavior. Microarray analysis of Mmp19-/- lung fibroblasts revealed the dysregulation of several profibrotic pathways, including ECM formation, migration, proliferation, and autophagy. Functional studies confirmed these findings. Compared with wild-type mice, Mmp19-/- lung fibroblasts showed increased α1 (I) collagen gene and collagen protein production at baseline and after transforming growth factor-β treatment and increased smooth muscle-α actin expression (P &lt; 0.05). Likewise, Mmp19-deficient lung fibroblasts showed a significant increase in proliferation (P &lt; 0.01) and in transmigration and locomotion over Boyden chambers coated with type I collagen or with Matrigel (P &lt; 0.05). These findings suggest that, in lung fibroblasts, MMP-19 has strong regulatory effects on the synthesis of key ECM components, on fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation, and in migration and proliferation.<newchar>collagen<n-term>fibroblasts<n-term>lung fibrosis<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term><newabs>22271550<newchar>The mammary gland is one of the best-studied examples of an organ whose structure and function are influenced by reciprocal signaling and communication between cells and their microenvironment. The mammary epithelial cell (MEC) microenvironment includes stromal cells and extracellular matrix (ECM). Abundant evidence shows that the ECM and growth factors co-operate to regulate cell cycle progression, and that the ECM is altered in breast tumors. In particular, mammographically dense breast tissue is a significant risk factor for developing breast carcinomas. Dense breast tissue is associated with increased stromal collagen and epithelial cell content. In this article, we overview recent studies addressing the effects of ECM composition on the breast cancer cell cycle. Although the normal breast ECM keeps the MEC cycle in check, the ECM remodeling associated with breast cancer positively regulates the MEC cycle. ECM effects on the downstream biochemical and mechanosignaling pathways in both normal and tumorigenic MECs will be reviewed.<newchar><newabs>21532121<newchar>It has been demonstrated that osteocalcin, osteoblast-derived molecule, regulates glucose/lipid metabolism through increasing insulin secretion from pancreas and insulin sensitivity in peripheral tissues. This finding established that bone is an important endocrine organ to regulate glucose/lipid metabolism. Recently, it has been reported that insulin signaling in osteoblasts was a positive regulator of bone acquisition, but also of bone resorption. Interestingly, insulin signaling in osteoblasts activated osteocalcin embedded in bone ECM by stimulating resorption activity in osteoclast. This finding indicated that the osteoblasts is an important target cells used by insulin which playing a central role in glucose/lipid metabolism. The bone/glucose metabolism interaction established by these studies will be important to a study of the two fields in the future, particularly a clinical field.<newchar><newabs>20804863<newchar>Many degenerative disease processes associated with aging result from enhanced extracellular matrix (ECM) breakdown. Concomitant with aberrant matrix destruction are alterations in levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generating and detoxification systems. ROS function as second messengers due to their ability to react with wide range of biomolecules resulting in modification of an array of signaling networks. ROS can activate upstream kinases (MKK) responsible for MAPK activation and restrict the activity of their inhibitory phosphatases. Here we focus on the redox-sensitive signaling components that control the expression of MMP-1, which is largely responsible for maintaining ECM homeostasis. Numerous disease processes are associated with shifts in steady state ROS levels that influence overall ECM degradation. This review highlights the redox-sensitive regulatory signals that control the expression of the primary initiating protease MMP-1 and provides strong rational for the use of antioxidant based therapies for treatment of degenerative disorders associated with aberrant matrix destruction.<newchar><newabs>25578260<newchar>The injured spinal cord does not heal properly. In contrast, tissue repair and functional recovery occur after skin or muscle injuries. The reason for this dichotomy in wound repair is unclear but inflammation, and specifically macrophage activation, likely plays a key role. Macrophages have the ability to promote the repair of injured tissue by regulating transitions through different phase of the healing response. In the current review we compare and contrast the healing and inflammatory responses between spinal cord injuries and tissues that undergo complete wound resolution. Through this comparison, we identify key macrophage phenotypes that are inaptly triggered or absent after spinal cord injury and discuss spinal cord stimuli that contribute to this maladaptive response. Sequential activation of classic, pro-inflammatory, M1 macrophages and alternatively activated, M2a, M2b, and M2c macrophages occurs during normal healing and facilitates transitions through the inflammatory, proliferative, and remodeling phases of repair. In contrast, in the injured spinal cord, pro-inflammatory macrophages potentiate a prolonged inflammatory phase and remodeling is not properly initiated. The desynchronized macrophage activation after spinal cord injury is reminiscent of the inflammation present in chronic, non-healing wounds. By refining the role macrophages play in spinal cord injury repair we bring to light important areas for future neuroinflammation and neurotrauma research. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled SI: Spinal cord injury.<newchar>Alternative activation<n-term>Arginase<n-term>Astrocyte<n-term>Axon<n-term>CD206<n-term>Dieback<n-term>ECM<n-term>Fizz-1<n-term>Healing<n-term>IL-10<n-term>IL-12<n-term>IL-1b<n-term>IL-4<n-term>IL-6<n-term>Immune complex<n-term>Inflammation<n-term>LPS<n-term>M1<n-term>M2<n-term>M2b<n-term>M2c<n-term>MARCO<n-term>Macrophage<n-term>Mannose<n-term>Microglia<n-term>Monocyte<n-term>Myelination<n-term>Neuroinflammation<n-term>Neurotrauma<n-term>OPC<n-term>Oligodendrocyte<n-term>PPAR<n-term>Phenotype<n-term>Proliferation<n-term>Reactive oxygen species<n-term>Receptor<n-term>Regeneration<n-term>Regulatory<n-term>Remyelination<n-term>Retraction<n-term>SCI<n-term>SLAM<n-term>STAT3<n-term>STAT6<n-term>TBI<n-term>TGF-beta<n-term>TLR<n-term>TNF-alpha<n-term>Transcription factors<n-term>Traumatic brain injury<n-term>VEGF<n-term>Wound<n-term>Ym1<n-term><newabs>25841788<newchar>Regular exercise induces a variety of structural changes in the hippocampus of rodents, although the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Particularly, the possible involvement of molecules regulating the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is under-studied. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), an extracellular protease, plays a critical role in regulating neuronal plasticity by remodeling the ECM in the brain. The current study used gel zymography to examine for changes in the proteolytic activity of MMP-9 in the rat hippocampus following a bout of treadmill exercise at mild (10m/min) or moderate (25m/min) intensity. We found that MMP-9 activity was significantly increased at 12h after mild treadmill exercise. However, the activity of MMP-2 and the expression level of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) were unchanged following exercise. These findings suggest that exercise triggers MMP-9 activation in the hippocampus, which might be a new molecular mechanism of exercise-induced hippocampal plasticity.<newchar>Exercise<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Gel zymography<n-term>Hippocampus<n-term>MMP-9<n-term><newabs>23180361<newchar>Asthma is characterized by eosinophilic airway inflammation and remodeling of the airway wall. Features of airway remodeling include increased airway smooth muscle (ASM) mass. However, little is known about the interaction between inflammatory eosinophils and ASM cells. In this study, we investigated the effect of eosinophils on ASM cell proliferation. Eosinophils were isolated from peripheral blood of mild asthmatics and non-asthmatic subjects and co-cultured with human primary ASM cells. ASM proliferation was estimated using Ki-67 expression assay. The expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) mRNA in ASM cells was measured using quantitative real-time PCR. The role of eosinophil derived Cysteinyl Leukotrienes (CysLTs) in enhancing ASM proliferation was estimated by measuring the release of leukotrienes from eosinophils upon their direct contact with ASM cells using ELISA. This role was confirmed either by blocking eosinophil-ASM contact or co-culturing them in the presence of leukotrienes antagonist. ASM cells co-cultured with eosinophils, isolated from asthmatics, but not non-asthmatics, had a significantly higher rate of proliferation compared to controls. This increase in ASM proliferation was independent of their release of ECM proteins but dependent upon eosinophils release of CysLTs. Eosinophil-ASM cell to cell contact was required for CysLTs release. Preventing eosinophil contact with ASM cells using anti-adhesion molecules antibodies, or blocking the activity of eosinophil derived CysLTs using montelukast inhibited ASM proliferation. Our results indicated that eosinophils contribute to airway remodeling during asthma by enhancing ASM cell proliferation and hence increasing ASM mass. Direct contact of eosinophils with ASM cells triggers their release of CysLTs which enhance ASM proliferation. Eosinophils, and their binding to ASM cells, constitute a potential therapeutic target to interfere with the series of biological events leading to airway remodeling and Asthma.<newchar><newabs>25071472<newchar>Dendritic spines are the locus for excitatory synaptic transmission in the brain and thus play a major role in neuronal plasticity. The ability to alter synaptic connections includes volumetric changes in dendritic spines that are driven by scaffolds created by the extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we review the effects of the proteolytic activity of ECM proteases in physiological and pathological structural plasticity. We use matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) as an example of an ECM modifier that has recently emerged as a key molecule in regulating the morphology and dysmorphology of dendritic spines that underlie synaptic plasticity and neurological disorders, respectively. We summarize the influence of MMP-9 on the dynamic remodeling of the ECM via the cleavage of extracellular substrates. We discuss its role in the formation, modification, and maintenance of dendritic spines in learning and memory. Finally, we review research that implicates MMP-9 in aberrant synaptic plasticity and spine dysmorphology in neurological disorders, with a focus on morphological abnormalities of dendritic protrusions that are associated with epilepsy.<newchar>dendritic spines<n-term>epilepsy<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase-9<n-term>structural synaptic plasticity<n-term><newabs>12952018<newchar>While current therapeutic strategies restore blood flow to the ischemic myocardium and limit infarct size, adverse left ventricular (LV) remodeling that progresses to dysfunction remains a significant complication following myocardial infarction (MI). The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a key component in the remodeling process, and increases in collagen occur in the infarct area to replace necrotic myocytes and form a scar. The ECM is coupled to the cell through cell surface receptors, primary of which are the integrins. In addition, the matrix metalloproteinases coordinate ECM turnover through degradation of ECM components. Several laboratories have demonstrated matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) participation in remodeling events that lead to LV dilation, and inhibition or targeted deletion of specific MMPs has beneficial effects post-MI. MMP inhibition is a particular focus of recent studies designed to understand the underlying mechanisms of LV remodeling and to evaluate pharmacologic strategies that target the ECM to affect adverse LV remodeling following MI.<newchar><newabs>23375582<newchar>Vascular fibrosis, characterized by reduced lumen diameter and arterial wall thickening attributable to excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), links with many clinical diseases and pathological progresses including atherosclerosis. It involves proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC), accumulation of ECM and inhibition of matrix degradation. The risk factors associated with cardiovascular disease, including hypertension, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia and hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy), are also suggested as initiation and progression factors of vascular fibrosis. Vascular fibrosis has been found to relate to renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), oxidative stress, inflammatory factors, growth factors and imbalance of endothelium-derived cytokine secretion. Angiotensin II (Ang II) and aldosterone, the circulating effector hormones of RAAS, are recognized as responsible for the pathophysiology of vascular fibrosis. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) plays a critical role in ECM accumulation and vascular remodeling via up-regulating the production of several agents including connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and fibroblast growth factor. An imbalance between matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) results in collagen accumulation and adverse matrix remodeling. Aberrant expression or function of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma) is also associated with, and very likely contributes to, the progression of pathological fibrosis and vascular remodeling. In this review, we discuss the pathogenesis of vascular fibrosis in atherosclerosis with focus on the networking among main responsible mediators. The main pathophysiologic factors leading to vascular fibrosis will also be discussed.<newchar>Atherosclerosis<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Pathogenesis<n-term>Risk factors<n-term>Signal transduction<n-term><newabs>26157796<newchar>The surgical reconstruction of ureteric defects is often associated with post-operative complications and requires additional medical care. Decellularized ureters originating from porcine donors could represent an alternative therapy. Our aim was to investigate the possibility of manufacturing decellularized ureters, the characteristics of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the biocompatibility of these grafts in vitro/in vivo after treatment with different crosslinking agents. To achieve these goals, native ureters were obtained from pigs and were decellularized. The success of decellularization and the ECM composition were characterized by (immuno)histological staining methods and a DNA-assay. In vitro: scaffolds were crosslinked either with carbodiimide (CDI), genipin (GP), glutaraldehyde, left chemically untreated or were lyophilized. Scaffolds in each group were reseeded with Caco2, LS48, 3T3 cells, or native rat smooth muscle cells (SMC). After 2 weeks, the number of ingrown cells was quantified. In vivo: crosslinked scaffolds were implanted subcutaneously into rats and the type of infiltrating cells were determined after 1, 9, and 30 days. After decellularization, scaffold morphology and composition of ECM were maintained, all cellular components were removed, DNA destroyed and strongly reduced. In vitro: GP and CDI scaffolds revealed a higher number of ingrown 3T3 and SMC cells as compared to untreated scaffolds. In vivo: at day 30, implants were predominantly infiltrated by fibroblasts and M2 anti-inflammatory macrophages. A maximum of MMP3 was observed in the CDI group at day 30. TIMP1 was below the detection limit. In this study, we demonstrated the potential of decellularization to create biocompatible porcine ureteric grafts, whereas a CDI-crosslink may facilitate the remodeling process. The use of decellularized ureteric grafts may represent a novel therapeutic method in reconstruction of ureteric defects.<newchar>crosslinking<n-term>decellualrization<n-term>scaffold<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term>ureter<n-term><newabs>15780796<newchar>Once considered an inert physical scaffolding, the extracellular matrix (ECM) is increasingly being appreciated as a central structural support and dynamic signaling system for cells to assemble into functional tissues. The ECM can respond to environmental stimuli and tissue injury by altering its abundance, composition, and spatial organization, with profound consequences on the structure and function of the tissues that it inhabits. ECM remodeling is now recognized as a central process underlying the maladaptive reorganization of cardiac size, shape, and function during the progression of CHF. ECM remodeling is largely determined by the balance of degradative enzymes, the MMPs, with respect to a highly regulated and complex assortment of multifunctional endogenous inhibitors, the TIMPs. Clinical studies over the past decade document increased MMP activities associated with diseased hearts. Animal models of cardiovascular disease, as well as transgenic mouse models, further support a role for MMPs in cardiac remodeling. Similarly, clinical, experimental, and genetic approaches implicate the involvement of TIMPs in heart disease, and TIMP expression is selectively reduced in the failing heart. The four known TIMP species are differentially regulated in the heart, and their specific role during the progression of CHF is not clear. Unique among TIMPs, TIMP-3 is ECM bound, highly expressed in the heart, uniformly reduced in failing hearts, and a potent endogenous inhibitor of MMPs and A Disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAMs) implicated in cardiac disease. The control of ECM remodeling in the failing heart may provide a missing link in our currently inadequate armamentarium of treatments for patients with CHF, and a better understanding of the complex role of TIMP proteins in the normal and failing myocardium, particularly the unique role of TIMP-3, may facilitate the development of targeted anti-remodeling strategies.<newchar><newabs>25569379<newchar>Calcific aortic stenosis (CAS) is the most common valvular disease in Western countries. Histological findings in patients with CAS extremely resemble those of atherosclerosis and include accumulation and modification of lipoproteins, inflammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, and calcification. Angiogenesis is another prominent feature of CAS; however, there is only a limited amount of data available regarding the mechanisms behind the pathological neovascularization of a structure that is originally avascular. The present study aims to identify the molecular basis that regulates blood vessel growth in stenotic aortic valves, focusing on the role of HIF-1α and VEGF pathway. A total of 19 native degenerating aortic valves obtained at valve replacement surgery have been processed for Western blot, immunohistochemical, morphometric, and ultrastructural analyses. First, we have demonstrated the adverse ECM remodeling and the significant thickening of the leaflet also showing that HIF-1α and VEGF are significantly upregulated in the stenotic valves, are locally produced and colocalize with angiogenesis and areas of calcification. Next, we have characterized, for the first time to the best of our knowledge, the morphological features of the neovasculature evidencing the presence of intact blood vessels in close proximity to the mineralized zones. These results suggest that the complex structural remodeling of the matrix might reduce oxygen availability in the valve cusp contributing to the stabilization of HIF-1α that in turn induces a metabolic adaptation through the upregulation of VEGF and the formation of new blood vessels not only to overcome the hypoxic state but also to sustain the calcification process.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>HIF-1α<n-term>VEGF<n-term>calcific aortic stenosis<n-term>immunohistochemistry<n-term>scanning electron microscopy<n-term><newabs>26820539<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), transported to the extracellular milieu through the secretory pathway, and assembled into an extracellular architecture. A previous study of ours showed that periostin, a secretory protein, interacts with fibronectin and is involved in ECM remodeling. Here we show that periostin played a role in fibronectin secretion from the ER. Co-immunoprecipitation and in situ proximity ligation assays revealed an interaction between periostin and fibronectin in the ER. Although accumulation of fibronectin was detected in the ER of fibroblastic C3H10T1/2 cells, forced expression of periostin in those cells decreased the accumulation of fibronectin in the ER, suggesting that periostin promoted the secretion of fibronectin. A substitution mutant of tryptophan at the position 65 to alanine in the EMI domain of periostin, which caused periostin to lose its ability to interact with fibronectin, did not decrease the accumulation. Furthermore, targeted disruption of periostin in mice caused the non-fibrillar and ectopic deposition of fibronectin in the periodontal ligament. Thus, these results demonstrate a subcellular role of periostin in promotion of fibronectin secretion from the ER.<newchar>Endoplasmic reticulum<n-term>Fibronectin<n-term>Periodontal ligament<n-term>Periostin<n-term><newabs>23254341<newchar>Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), a key mediator of fibrotic responses, is increased in asthma and drives airway remodeling by inducing expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. We investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying TGF-β-induced ECM expression by airway smooth muscle cells and demonstrate a novel link between TGF-β and Wingless/integrase 1 (WNT) signaling in ECM deposition. Airway smooth muscle expresses abundant WNT ligands, with the noncanonical WNT-5A being the most profoundly expressed. Interestingly, WNT-5A shows ∼2-fold higher abundance in airway smooth muscle cells isolated from individuals with asthma than individuals without asthma. WNT-5A is markedly induced in response to TGF-β (4-16-fold; EC₅₀ 0.3 ng/ml) and is required for collagen and fibronectin expression by airway smooth muscle. WNT-5A engages noncanonical WNT signaling pathways, as inhibition of Ca(2+) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling attenuated this TGF-β response, whereas the canonical WNT antagonist Dickkopf 1 (DKK-1) did not. Accordingly, WNT-5A induced JNK phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 (NFATc1). Furthermore, silencing of the WNT-5A receptors Frizzled 8 (FZD8) and RYK attenuated TGF-β-induced ECM expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that noncanonical WNT-5A signaling is activated by and necessary for TGF-β-induced ECM production by airway smooth muscle cells, which could have significance in asthma pathogenesis.<newchar><newabs>23841513<newchar>Physical properties of the tissues and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) play an important role in organ development. Recently, we have reported that low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) 5/Tie2 signaling controls postnatal lung development by modulating angiogenesis. Here we show that tissue stiffness modulated by the ECM cross-linking enzyme, lysyl oxidase (LOX), regulates postnatal lung development through LRP5-Tie2 signaling. The expression of LRP5 and Tie2 is up-regulated twofold in lung microvascular endothelial cells when cultured on stiff matrix compared to those cultured on soft matrix in vitro. LOX inhibitor, β-aminopropionitrile, disrupts lung ECM (collagen I, III, and VI, and elastin) structures, softens neonatal mouse lung tissue by 20%, and down-regulates the expression of LRP5 and Tie2 by 20 and 60%, respectively, which leads to the inhibition of postnatal lung development (30% increase in mean linear intercept, 1.5-fold increase in air space area). Importantly, hyperoxia treatment (Postnatal Days 1-10) disrupts ECM structure and stiffens mouse lung tissue by up-regulating LOX activity, thereby increasing LRP5 and Tie2 expression and deregulating alveolar morphogenesis in neonatal mice, which is attenuated by inhibiting LOX activity. These findings suggest that appropriate physical properties of lung tissue are necessary for physiological postnatal lung development, and deregulation of this mechanism contributes to postnatal lung developmental disorders, such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia.<newchar><newabs>26748307<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts produce the extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold within which the various cellular components of the heart are organized. As well as providing structural support, it is becoming evident that the quality and quantity of ECM is a key factor for determining cardiac cell behavior during development and in pathological contexts such as heart failure involving fibrosis. Cardiac fibroblasts have long remained a poorly characterized cardiac lineage. Well characterized markers are now paving the way for a better understanding of the roles of these cells in various developmental and disease contexts. Notably, the relevance of processes including endothelial-tomesenchymal transition and the recruitment of circulating fibroblast progenitors in heart failure has been challenged. This review describes the latest findings on cardiac fibroblast markers and developmental origins, and discusses their importance in myocardial remodeling. Effective modulation of cardiac fibroblast activity would likely contribute to successful treatment of various cardiac disorders.<newchar>Cardiac lineage<n-term>Fibroblast<n-term>Fibroblast markers<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Hypertrophy<n-term>Myocardial infarction<n-term><newabs>24746961<newchar>The vascular grafts prepared by electrospinning often have relatively small pores, which limit cell infiltration into the grafts and hinder the regeneration and remodeling of the grafts into neoarteries. To overcome this problem, macroporous electrospun polycaprolactone (PCL) scaffolds with thicker fibers (5-6 μm) and larger pores (∼30 μm) were fabricated in the present study. In vitro cell culture indicated that macrophages cultured on thicker-fiber scaffolds tended to polarize into the immunomodulatory and tissue remodeling (M2) phenotype, while those cultured on thinner-fiber scaffolds expressed proinflammatory (M1) phenotype. In vivo implantation by replacing rat abdominal aorta was performed and followed up for 7, 14, 28 and 100 d. The results demonstrated that the macroporous grafts markedly enhanced cell infiltration and extracellular matrix (ECM) secretion. All grafts showed satisfactory patency for up to 100 days. At day 100, the endothelium coverage was complete, and the regenerated smooth muscle layer was correctly organized with abundant ECM similar to those in the native arteries. More importantly, the regenerated arteries demonstrated contractile response to adrenaline and acetylcholine-induced relaxation. Analysis of the cellularization process revealed that the thicker-fiber scaffolds induced a large number of M2 macrophages to infiltrate into the graft wall. These macrophages further promoted cellular infiltration and vascularization. In conclusion, the present study confirmed that the scaffold structure can regulate macrophage phenotype. Our thicker-fiber electrospun PCL vascular grafts could enhance the vascular regeneration and remodeling process by mediating macrophage polarization into M2 phenotype, suggesting that our constructs may be a promising cell-free vascular graft candidate and are worthy for further in vivo evaluation.<newchar>Cellularization<n-term>Electrospinning<n-term>Macrophage polarization<n-term>PCL<n-term>Vascular grafts<n-term><newabs>26230845<newchar>The presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) or tumor-initiating cells can lead to cancer recurrence in a permissive cell-microenvironment interplay, promoting invasion in glioblastoma (GBM) and neuroblastoma (NB). Extracellular matrix (ECM) small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs) play multiple roles in tissue homeostasis by remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) components and modulating intracellular signaling pathways. Due to their pan-inhibitory properties against receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), SLRPs are reported to exert anticancer effects in vitro and in vivo. However, their roles seem to be tissue-specific and they are also involved in cancer cell migration and drug resistance, paving the way to complex different scenarios. The aim of this study was to determine whether the SLRPs decorin (DCN) and lumican (LUM) are recruited in cell plasticity and microenvironmental adaptation of differentiated cancer cells induced towards stem-like phenotype. Floating neurospheres were generated by applying CSC enrichment medium (neural stem cell serum-free medium, NSC SFM) to the established SF-268 and SK-N-SH cancer cell lines, cellular models of GBM and NB, respectively. In both models, the time-dependent synergistic activation of DCN and LUM was observed. The highest DCN and LUM mRNA/protein expression was detected after cell exposure to NSC SFM for 8/12 days, considering these cells as SLRP-expressing (SLRP+) CSC-like. Ultrastructural imaging showed the cellular heterogeneity of both the GBM and NB neurospheres and identified the inner living cells. Parental cell lines of both GBM and NB grew only in soft agar + NSC SFM, whereas the secondary neurospheres (originated from SLRP+ t8 CSC-like) showed lower proliferation rates than primary neurospheres. Interestingly, the SLRP+ CSC-like from the GBM and NB neurospheres were resistant to temozolomide (TMZ) at concentrations &gt;750 μM. Our results suggest that GBM and NB CSC-like promote the activation of huge quantities of SLRP in response to CSC enrichment, simultaneously acquiring TMZ resistance, cellular heterogeneity, and a quiescent phenotype, suggesting a novel pivotal role for SLRP in drug resistance and cell plasticity of CSC-like, allowing cell survival and ECM/niche modulation potential.<newchar><newabs>21176409<newchar>Embryonic stem (ES) cell transplantation represents a potential means for the treatment of degenerative diseases and injuries. As appropriate distribution of transplanted ES cells in the host tissue is critical for successful transplantation, the exploration of efficient strategies to enhance ES cell migration is warranted. In this study we investigated ES cell migration under the influence of various extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, which have been shown to stimulate cell migration in various cell models with unclear effects on ES cells. Using two mouse ES (mES) cell lines, ESC 26GJ9012-8-2 and ES-D3 GL, to generate embryoid bodies (EBs), we examined the migration of differentiating cells from EBs that were delivered onto culture surfaces coated with or without collagen I, collagen IV, Matrigel, fibronectin, and laminin. Among these ECM proteins, collagen IV exhibited maximal migration enhancing effect. mES cells expressed α2 and β1 integrin subunits and the migration enhancing effect of collagen IV was prevented by RGD peptides as well as antibodies against α2 and β1 integrins, indicating that the enhancing effect of collagen IV on cell migration was mediated by α2β1 integrin. Furthermore, staining of actin cytoskeleton that links to integrins revealed well-developed stress fibers and long filopodia in mES cells cultured on collagen IV, and the actin-disrupting cytochalasin D abolished the collagen IV-enhanced cell migration. In addition, pretreatment of undifferentiated or differentiated mES cells with collagen IV resulted in improved engraftment and growth after transplantation into the subcutaneous tissue of nude mice. Finally, collagen IV pretreatment of osteogenically differentiated mES cells increased osteogenic differentiation-like tissue and decreased undifferentiation-like tissue in the grafts grown after transplantation. Our results demonstrated that collagen IV significantly enhanced the migration of differentiating ES cells through α2β1 integrin-mediated actin remodeling and could promote ES cell transplantation efficiency, which may be imperative to stem cell therapy.<newchar><newabs>26839554<newchar>Despite recent progress in vascularized composite allotransplantation (VCA), limitations including complex, high dose immunosuppression regimens, lifelong risk of toxicity from immunosuppressants, acute and most critically chronic graft rejection, and suboptimal nerve regeneration remain particularly challenging obstacles restricting clinical progress. When properly configured, customized, and implemented, biomaterials derived from the extracellular matrix (ECM) retain bioactive molecules and immunomodulatory properties that can promote stem cell migration, proliferation and differentiation, and constructive functional tissue remodeling. The present paper reviews the emerging implications of ECM-based technologies in VCA, including local immunomodulation, tissue repair, nerve regeneration, minimally invasive graft targeted drug delivery, stem cell transplantation, and other donor graft manipulation.<newchar><newabs>25759820<newchar>This study aimed to evaluate the genes that were expressed in the healing bones around SLA-treated titanium orthodontic mini-implants in a beagle at early (1-week) and late (4-week) stages with RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq). Samples from sites of surgical defects were used as controls. Total RNA was extracted from the tissue around the implants, and an RNA-Seq analysis was performed with Illumina TruSeq. In the 1-week group, genes in the gene ontology (GO) categories of cell growth and the extracellular matrix (ECM) were upregulated, while genes in the categories of the oxidation-reduction process, intermediate filaments, and structural molecule activity were downregulated. In the 4-week group, the genes upregulated included ECM binding, stem cell fate specification, and intramembranous ossification, while genes in the oxidation-reduction process category were downregulated. GO analysis revealed an upregulation of genes that were related to significant mechanisms, including those with roles in cell proliferation, the ECM, growth factors, and osteogenic-related pathways, which are associated with bone formation. From these results, implant-induced bone formation progressed considerably during the times examined in this study. The upregulation or downregulation of selected genes was confirmed with real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The RNA-Seq strategy was useful for defining the biological responses to orthodontic mini-implants and identifying the specific genetic networks for targeted evaluations of successful peri-implant bone remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26798356<newchar>The study of cancer biology has mainly focused on malignant epithelial cancer cells, although tumors also contain a stromal compartment, which is composed of stem cells, tumor-associated fibroblasts (TAFs), endothelial cells, immune cells, adipocytes, cytokines, and various types of macromolecules comprising the extracellular matrix (ECM). The tumor stroma develops gradually in response to the needs of epithelial cancer cells during malignant progression initiating from increased local vascular permeability and ending to remodeling of desmoplastic loosely vascularized stromal ECM. The constant bidirectional interaction of epithelial cancer cells with the surrounding microenvironment allows damaged stromal cell usage as a source of nutrients for cancer cells, maintains the stroma renewal thus resembling a wound that does not heal, and affects the characteristics of tumor mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs). Although MSCs have been shown to coordinate tumor cell growth, dormancy, migration, invasion, metastasis, and drug resistance, recently they have been successfully used in treatment of hematopoietic malignancies to enhance the effect of total body irradiation-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation therapy. Hence, targeting the stromal elements in combination with conventional chemotherapeutics and usage of MSCs to attenuate graft-versus-host disease may offer new strategies to overcome cancer treatment failure and relapse of the disease.<newchar><newabs>26885515<newchar>To investigate the mechanism of superficial stromal scarring in advanced keratoconus using confocal microscopy, the keratocyte density, distribution, micromorphology of corneal stroma, and SNP in three groups were observed. Eight corneal buttons of advanced keratoconus were examined by immunohistochemistry. The keratocyte densities in the sub-Bowman's stroma, anterior stroma, and posterior stroma and the mean SNP density were significantly different among the three groups. In the mild-to-moderate keratoconus group, activated keratocyte nuclei and comparatively highly reflective ECM were seen in the sub-Bowman's stroma, while fibrotic structures with comparatively high reflection were visible in the anterior stroma in advanced keratoconus. The alternating dark and light bands in the anterior stroma of the mild-to-moderate keratoconus group showed great variability in width and direction. The wide bands were localized mostly in the posterior stroma that corresponded to the Vogt striae in keratoconus and involved the anterior stroma only in advanced keratoconus. Histopathologically, high immunogenicity of α-SMA, vimentin, and FAP was expressed in the region of superficial stromal scarring. In vivo confocal microscopy revealed microstructural changes in the keratoconic cone. The activation of superficial keratocytes and abnormal remodeling of ECM may both play a key role in the superficial stromal scar formation in advanced keratoconus.<newchar><newabs>26332055<newchar>Emetine is a natural compound originated from ipecac roots. It was commonly used as anti-protozoal and vomiting agent. The apoptosis-inducing effect of emetine makes it considered as a potential anti-cancer agent for various human cancers. Here in this study, we report that emetine inhibits migration and invasion of human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Modulation of three major mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), ERK, p38 and JNK, is well known to be involved in regulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are essential in tissue remodeling and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, for cancer cells to spread out from the origin of tumorigenesis. Emetine regulates two major MAPKs, p38 and ERK. Differential inhibition/stimulation of ERK and p38 induced differential suppressions of β-catenin and c-myc transcription factors. This leads to the selective down-regulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9, two major gelatinases which can degrade ECM components, and RECK, a negative regulator of MMP-9.<newchar>ERK<n-term>Emetine<n-term>Human non-small-cell lung cancer<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>p38<n-term><newabs>27028103<newchar>Modulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling after peripheral nerve injury (PNI) could represent a valid therapeutic strategy to prevent maladaptive synaptic plasticity in central nervous system (CNS). Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and maintaining a neurotrophic support could represent two approaches to prevent or reduce the maladaptive plastic changes in the ventral horn of spinal cord following PNI. The purpose of our study was to analyze changes in the ventral horn produced by gliopathy determined by the suffering of motor neurons following spared nerve injury (SNI) of the sciatic nerve and how the intrathecal (i.t.) administration of GM6001 (a MMPs inhibitor) or the NGF mimetic peptide BB14 modulate these events. Immunohistochemical analysis of spinal cord sections revealed that motor neuron disease following SNI was associated with increased microglial (Iba1) and astrocytic (GFAP) response in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, indicative of reactive gliosis. These changes were paralleled by decreased glial aminoacid transporters (glutamate GLT1 and glycine GlyT1), increased levels of the neuronal glutamate transporter EAAC1, and a net increase of the Glutamate/GABA ratio, as measured by HPLC analysis. These molecular changes correlated to a significant reduction of mature NGF levels in the ventral horn. Continuous i.t. infusion of both GM6001 and BB14 reduced reactive astrogliosis, recovered the expression of neuronal and glial transporters, lowering the Glutamate/GABA ratio. Inhibition of MMPs by GM6001 significantly increased mature NGF levels, but it was absolutely ineffective in modifying the reactivity of microglia cells. Therefore, MMPs inhibition, although supplies neurotrophic support to ECM components and restores neuro-glial transporters expression, differently modulates astrocytic and microglial response after PNI.<newchar><newabs>22519444<newchar>Inflammatory process is essential for the initiation and progression of vascular remodeling, entailing degradation and reorganization of the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) scaffold of the vessel wall, leading to the development of atherosclerotic lesions. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zing dependent endo-peptidases found in most living organisms and act mainly by degrading ECM components. Most MMPs are formed as inactive proenzymes and are activated by proteolysis. This process depends and is regulated by other proteases and endogenous MMP inhibitors (TIMPs). MMPs and TIMPs play a major role not only in ECM degradation but also in mediating cell migration, proliferation, tissue remodeling; acting as a signal for the production and secretion of growth factors and cytokines. More importantly MMPs through proteolysis and degradation of ECM contribute in many physiological and pathological processes including organ development, wound healing, tissue support, vascular remodeling and restenosis, atherosclerosis progression, acute coronary syndromes, myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, aneurysms remodeling, cancer, arthritis, and chronic inflammatory diseases. A substantial body of evidence support the notion that imbalance between the activity of MMPs and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) contribute to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, vascular remodeling and progression of heart failure. In this review, we will discuss the relationship between MMPs, inflammation and atherosclerosis under the topic of cardiovascular disease.<newchar><newabs>25906101<newchar>Chronic myeloproliferative disorders such as polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocytosis (ET), and idiopathic myelofibrosis arise from clonal proliferation of neoplastic stem cells in the bone marrow. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases that have potential to degrade all types of extracellular matrix (ECM) and also play a role in remodeling of the ECM. It is known that MMPs play a role in bone marrow remodeling.The primary goal of our study is to explore the relationship between chronic myeloproliferative diseases and some of MMP gene polymorphisms. The demonstration of a relationship will help to understand whether these polymorphisms may be a potential early diagnosis marker of the diseases.Patients were selected from outpatient clinics of Turgut Ozal University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, between December 2010 and May 2011. Twenty-eight patients that previously diagnosed and followed-up with PV, 17 with secondary polycythemia (SP), and 12 with ET were enrolled in the study, along with a control group of 22 healthy people.DNA was isolated from peripheral blood. Using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method, MMP2 and MMP9 gene polymorphisms were analyzed with agarose gel electrophoresis. There was a statistically significant difference between the study groups and the control group in terms of Gln279Arg polymorphisms rates of MMP9. The highest MMP9 Gln279Arg polymorphism rate was observed in the ET group. But nobody from the control group had polymorphic MMP9. There was no statistically significant difference between the groups in terms of MMP2-735 C &gt; T polymorphism rates.In conclusion, MMP9 gene Gln279Arg polymorphism was associated with ET, SP, and PV diseases. Hence, we believe that these gene polymorphisms may play a role in the mechanism of bone marrow fibrosis and may be a factor that increases the risk of thrombosis. Illumination of the molecular basis of the relationship between MMP-thrombosis and MMP-fibrosis provides a better understanding of the pathophysiology of PV and ET diseases and will allow new approaches to diagnosis and treatment.<newchar><newabs>25716558<newchar>The synthesis and accumulation of collagen play an important role in the formation and progression of hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Baicalin has been reported to prevent bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. However, the role of baicalin in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension remains unknown. A disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type-1 motif (ADAMTS-1) is a secreted enzyme that acts on a wide variety of extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates associated with vascular diseases. In this study, we aimed to investigate the effects of baicalin on the synthesis of collagen I in rats with pulmonary hypertension induced by hypoxia and the changes in ADAMTS-1 expression. A total of 24 Sprague Dawley rats were randomly assigned to 3 groups as follows: the control group (C), the hypoxia group (H) and the hypoxia + baicalin group (B). The rats in groups H and B were kept in a normobaric hypoxic chamber for 4 weeks, and the rats in group C were exposed to room air. We measured the hemodynamic indexes, including mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP), mean systemic (carotid) artery pressure (mSAP), and then calculated the mass ratio of right ventricle to left ventricle plus septum [RV/(LV + S)] to reflect the extent of right ventricular hypertrophy. We measured the mRNA and protein expression levels of type I collagen, type III collagen and ADAMTS-1 by hybridization in situ, and immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis, respectively. The results revealed that treatment with baicalin significantly reduced pulmonary artery pressure and attenuated the remodeling of the pulmonary artery under hypoxic conditions by increasing the expression of ADAMTS-1, so that the synthesis of type I collagen and its mRNA expression were inhibited. In conclusion, baicalin effectively inhibits the synthesis of collagen I in pulmonary arteries and this is associated with an increase in the expression of ADAMTS-1. Thus, treatment with baicalin may be an effective method for lowering pulmonary artery pressure and preventing pulmonary artery remodeling.<newchar><newabs>21717224<newchar>Remodeling of the myocardium and the extracellular matrix (ECM) occurs in heart failure irrespective of its initial cause. The ECM serves as a scaffold to provide structural support as well as housing a number of cytokines and growth factors. Hence, disruption of the ECM will result in structural instability as well as activation of a number of signaling pathways that could lead to fibrosis, hypertrophy, and apoptosis. The ECM is a dynamic entity that undergoes constant turnover, and the integrity of its network structure is maintained by a balance in the function of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors, the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). In heart disease, levels of MMPs and TIMPs are altered resulting in an imbalance between these two families of proteins. In this review, we will discuss the structure, function, and regulation of TIMPs, their MMP-independent functions, and their role in heart failure. We will review the knowledge that we have gained from clinical studies and animal models on the contribution of TIMPs in the development and progression of heart disease. We will further discuss how ECM molecules and regulatory genes can be used as biomarkers of disease in heart failure patients.<newchar><newabs>25589360<newchar>Placental development is a highly regulated process requiring signals from both fetal and maternal uterine compartments. Within this complex system, trophoblasts, placental cells of epithelial lineage, form the maternal-fetal interface controlling nutrient, gas and waste exchange. The commitment of progenitor villous cytotrophoblasts to differentiate into diverse trophoblast subsets is a fundamental process in placental development. Differentiation of trophoblasts into invasive stromal- and vascular-remodeling subtypes is essential for uterine arterial remodeling and placental function. Inadequate placentation, characterized by defects in trophoblast differentiation, may underlie the earliest cellular events driving pregnancy disorders such as preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Molecularly, invasive trophoblasts acquire characteristics defined by profound alterations in cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion, cytoskeletal reorganization and production of proteolytic factors. To date, most studies have investigated the importance of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their ability to efficiently remodel components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). However, it is now becoming clear that besides MMPs, other related proteases regulate trophoblast invasion via mechanisms other than ECM turnover. In this review, we will summarize the current knowledge on the regulation of trophoblast invasion by members of the metzincin family of metalloproteinases. Specifically, we will discuss the emerging roles that A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinases (ADAMs) play in placental development, with a particular focus on the ADAM subtype, ADAM12.<newchar>ADAM proteases<n-term>ADAM12<n-term>Cell invasion<n-term>Metzincin<n-term>Placenta<n-term>Trophoblast<n-term><newabs>21949685<newchar>Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC) is one of the major non-structural proteins of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in remodeling tissues. The functional significance of SPARC is emphasized by its origin in the first multicellular organisms and its high degree of evolutionary conservation. Although SPARC has been shown to act as a critical modulator of ECM remodeling with profound effects on tissue physiology and architecture, no plausible molecular mechanism of its action has been proposed. In the present study, we demonstrate that SPARC mediates the disassembly and degradation of ECM networks by functioning as a matricellular chaperone. While it has low affinity to its targets inside the cells where the Ca(2+) concentrations are low, high extracellular concentrations of Ca(2+) activate binding to multiple ECM proteins, including collagens. We demonstrated that in vitro, this leads to the inhibition of collagen I fibrillogenesis and disassembly of pre-formed collagen I fibrils by SPARC at high Ca(2+) concentrations. In cell culture, exogenous SPARC was internalized by the fibroblast cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Pulse-chase assay further revealed that internalized SPARC is quickly released outside the cell, demonstrating that SPARC shuttles between the cell and ECM. Fluorescently labeled collagen I, fibronectin, vitronectin, and laminin were co-internalized with SPARC by fibroblasts, and semi-quantitative Western blot showed that SPARC mediates internalization of collagen I. Using a novel 3-dimensional model of fluorescent ECM networks pre-deposited by live fibroblasts, we demonstrated that degradation of ECM depends on the chaperone activity of SPARC. These results indicate that SPARC may represent a new class of scavenger chaperones, which mediate ECM degradation, remodeling and repair by disassembling ECM networks and shuttling ECM proteins into the cell. Further understanding of this mechanism may provide insight into the pathogenesis of matrix-associated disorders and lead to the novel treatment strategies.<newchar><newabs>24404584<newchar>Type V collagen (Col V) molecule, a minor component of kidney connective tissues, was found in adult cornea, and has been considered as a regulatory fibril-forming collagen that emerges into type I collagen to trigger the initiation of Col I fiber assembly. Col V was also found in injured, wound healing tissues or placenta, and was considered as a dysfunctional extracellular matrix (ECM). Reconstituted Col V fibril was characterized as an ECM to detach cells in vitro, and our previous study showed that the reconstituted Col V fibril facilitated the migration of glomerular endothelial cells and induced ECM remodeling, whereas Col V molecules stabilized cells. These facts suggest that not only the structure but also the function of Col V fibril are different from Col V molecule. Recently, Col V molecule has been reported existing in various developing tissues such as bone and lung, but Col V fibril has not been reported yet. In this study, we firstly explored the existence of Col V fibril in metanephroi, and found it distributed in the immature kidney tissues whereas disappeared when the tissues reached mature. It is likely that Col V fibril may form a prototype of pericellular microenvironment and the transient existence of Col V fibril may play a role as the pioneering ECM during metanephric tissue morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>24352335<newchar>Tissue fibrosis occurs as a result of the dysregulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis. Tissue fibroblasts, resident cells responsible for the synthesis and turnover of ECM, are regulated via numerous hormonal and mechanical signals. The release of intracellular nucleotides and their resultant autocrine/paracrine signaling have been shown to play key roles in the homeostatic maintenance of tissue remodeling and in fibrotic response post-injury. Extracellular nucleotides signal through P2 nucleotide and P1 adenosine receptors to activate signaling networks that regulate the proliferation and activity of fibroblasts, which, in turn, influence tissue structure and pathologic remodeling. An important component in the signaling and functional responses of fibroblasts to extracellular ATP and adenosine is the expression and activity of ectonucleotideases that attenuate nucleotide-mediated signaling, and thereby integrate P2 receptor- and subsequent adenosine receptor-initiated responses. Results of studies of the mechanisms of cellular nucleotide release and the effects of this autocrine/paracrine signaling axis on fibroblast-to-myofibroblast conversion and the fibrotic phenotype have advanced understanding of tissue remodeling and fibrosis. This review summarizes recent findings related to purinergic signaling in the regulation of fibroblasts and the development of tissue fibrosis in the heart, lungs, liver, and kidney.<newchar>ATP<n-term>P2X<n-term>P2Y<n-term>adenosine<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>purinergic<n-term><newabs>21501375<newchar>To understand the process of cardiac aging, it is of crucial importance to gain insight into the age-related changes in gene expression in the senescent failing heart. Age-related cardiac remodeling is known to be accompanied by changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) gene and protein levels. Small noncoding microRNAs regulate gene expression in cardiac development and disease and have been implicated in the aging process and in the regulation of ECM proteins. However, their role in age-related cardiac remodeling and heart failure is unknown. In this study, we investigated the aging-associated microRNA cluster 17-92, which targets the ECM proteins connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1). We employed aged mice with a failure-resistant (C57Bl6) and failure-prone (C57Bl6 × 129Sv) genetic background and extrapolated our findings to human age-associated heart failure. In aging-associated heart failure, we linked an aging-induced increase in the ECM proteins CTGF and TSP-1 to a decreased expression of their targeting microRNAs 18a, 19a, and 19b, all members of the miR-17-92 cluster. Failure-resistant mice showed an opposite expression pattern for both the ECM proteins and the microRNAs. We showed that these expression changes are specific for cardiomyocytes and are absent in cardiac fibroblasts. In cardiomyocytes, modulation of miR-18/19 changes the levels of ECM proteins CTGF and TSP-1 and collagens type 1 and 3. Together, our data support a role for cardiomyocyte-derived miR-18/19 during cardiac aging, in the fine-tuning of cardiac ECM protein levels. During aging, decreased miR-18/19 and increased CTGF and TSP-1 levels identify the failure-prone heart.<newchar><newabs>25264617<newchar>Aortic aneurysm is a complex multifactorial disease, and its molecular mechanism is not understood. In thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA), the expansion of the aortic wall is lead by extracellular matrix (ECM) degeneration in the medial layer, which leads to weakening of the aortic wall. This dilatation may end in rupture and-if untreated-death. The aortic media is composed of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and proteins involved in aortic elasticity and distensibility. Delineating their functional and quantitative decrease is critical in elucidating the disease causing mechanisms as well as the development of new preventive therapies. Laser microdissection (LMD) is an advanced technology that enables the isolation of the desired portion of tissue or cells for proteomics analysis, while preserving their integrity. In our study, the aortic media layers of 36 TAA patients and 8 controls were dissected using LMD technology. The proteins isolated from these tissue samples were subjected to comparative proteomic analysis by nano-LC-MS/MS, which enabled the identification of 352 proteins in aortic media. Among these, 41 proteins were differentially expressed in the TAA group with respect to control group, and all were downregulated in the patients. Of these medial proteins, 25 are novel, and their association with TAA is reported for the first time in our study. Subsequent analysis of the data by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) shows that the majority of differentially expressed proteins were found to be cytoskeletal-associated proteins and components of the ECM which are critical in maintaining aortic integrity. Our results indicate that the protein expression profile in the aortic media from TAA patients differs significantly from controls. Further analysis of the mechanism points to markers of pathological ECM remodeling, which, in turn, affect VSMC cytosolic structure and architecture. In the future, the detailed investigation of the differentially expressed proteins may provide insight into the elucidation of the pathological processes underlying aneurysms.<newchar>label-free proteomics<n-term>laser capture microdissection<n-term>protein expression<n-term>thoracic aortic aneurysm<n-term>vascular smooth muscle<n-term><newabs>21220243<newchar>Myocardial fibrosis, progressive over-accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in cardiac muscle, defined as a key component of heart failure and since then various studies showed a strong connection between fibrosis and progression of heart failure. The impaired left ventricular diastolic and systolic functions that are originated by fibrosis are used to predict poor clinical outcome in dilated cardiomyopathy. Even though endomyocardial biopsy is still considered as a gold standard, various noninvasive imaging techniques have been used to detect presence, location and extend of myocardial fibrosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance emerged as a crucial noninvasive imagining technique because of its high accuracy and high fidelity in detection of fibrosis. The noninvasive assessment of fibrosis is advantageous in early prediction of possible adverse outcomes and creates an opportunity to utilize new therapeutic approaches that target fibrosis in heart failure.<newchar><newabs>19716828<newchar>Most of the available evidence on the role of neutrophils on pathological cardiac remodeling has been pertained after acute myocardial infarction. However, whether neutrophils directly contribute to the pathogenesis of cardiac remodeling after events other than acute myocardial infarction remains unknown. Here we show that acute eccentric hypertrophy induced by aorto-caval fistula (ACF) in the rats induced an increase in the inflammatory response characterized by activation of the STAT pathway and increased infiltration of neutrophils in the myocardium. This early inflammation was associated with a decrease in interstitial collagen accumulation and an increase in myocyte apoptosis. Neutrophil infiltration blockade attenuated MMP activation, ECM degradation, and myocyte apoptosis induced by ACF at 24 hours and attenuated the development of eccentric hypertrophy induced by ACF at 2 and 3 weeks, suggesting a causal relationship between neutrophils and the ACF-induced cardiac remodeling. In contrast, sustained neutrophil depletion over 4 weeks resulted in adverse cardiac remodeling with further increase in cardiac dilatation and macrophage infiltration, but with no change in myocyte apoptosis level. These data support a functional role for neutrophils in MMP activation, ECM degradation, and myocyte apoptosis during eccentric cardiac hypertrophy and underscore the adverse effects of chronic anti-neutrophil therapy on cardiac remodeling induced by early volume overload.<newchar><newabs>24513214<newchar>Type V collagen (Col V) molecule, a minor component of kidney connective tissues, was found in adult cornea, and has been considered as a regulatory fibril-forming collagen that emerges into type I collagen to trigger the initiation of Col I fiber assembly. Col V was also found in injured, wound healing tissues or placenta, and was considered as a dysfunctional extracellular matrix (ECM). Reconstituted Col V fibril was characterized as an ECM to detach cells in vitro, and our previous study showed that the reconstituted Col V fibril facilitated the migration of glomerular endothelial cells and induced ECM remodeling, whereas Col V molecules stabilized cells. These facts suggest that not only the structure but also the function of Col V fibril are different from Col V molecule. Recently, Cole V molecule has been reported existing in various developing tissues such as bone and lung, but Col V fibril has not been reported yet. In this study, we firstly explored the existence of Col V fibril in matanephroi, and found it distributed in the immature kidney tissues whereas disappeared when the tissues reached mature. It is likely that Col V fibril may form a prototype of pericellular microenvironment and the transient existence of Col V fibril may play a role as the pioneering ECM during metanephric tissue morphogenesis.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Metanephric kidney<n-term>Nephrogenesis<n-term>Type V collagen<n-term>Uriteric bud<n-term><newabs>24797928<newchar>Besides being a physical scaffold to maintain tissue morphology, the extracellular matrix (ECM) is actively involved in regulating cell and tissue function during development and organ homeostasis. It does so by acting via biochemical, biomechanical, and biophysical signaling pathways, such as through the release of bioactive ECM protein fragments, regulating tissue tension, and providing pathways for cell migration. The extracellular matrix of the tumor microenvironment undergoes substantial remodeling, characterized by the degradation, deposition and organization of fibrillar and non-fibrillar matrix proteins. Stromal stiffening of the tumor microenvironment can promote tumor growth and invasion, and cause remodeling of blood and lymphatic vessels. Live imaging of matrix proteins, however, to this point is limited to fibrillar collagens that can be detected by second harmonic generation using multi-photon microscopy, leaving the majority of matrix components largely invisible. Here we describe procedures for tumor inoculation in the thin dorsal ear skin, immunolabeling of extracellular matrix proteins and intravital imaging of the exposed tissue in live mice using epifluorescence and two-photon microscopy. Our intravital imaging method allows for the direct detection of both fibrillar and non-fibrillar matrix proteins in the context of a growing dermal tumor. We show examples of vessel remodeling caused by local matrix contraction. We also found that fibrillar matrix of the tumor detected with the second harmonic generation is spatially distinct from newly deposited matrix components such as tenascin C. We also showed long-term (12 hours) imaging of T-cell interaction with tumor cells and tumor cells migration along the collagen IV of basement membrane. Taken together, this method uniquely allows for the simultaneous detection of tumor cells, their physical microenvironment and the endogenous tissue immune response over time, which may provide important insights into the mechanisms underlying tumor progression and ultimate success or resistance to therapy.<newchar><newabs>25986954<newchar>We previously reported differences in stiffness between macro- and micro-vessels in type 2 diabetes (T2DM). The aim of this study was to define the mechanical properties of the ECM independent of vascular cells in coronary resistance micro-vessels (CRMs) and macro-vessels (aorta) in control Db/db and T2DM db/db mice. Passive vascular remodeling and mechanics were measured in both intact and decellularized CRMs and aortas from 0 to 125 mmHg. We observed no differences in intact control and diabetic aortic diameters, wall thicknesses, or stiffnesses (p &gt; 0.05). Aortic decellularization caused a significant increase in internal and external diameters and incremental modulus over a range of pressures that occurred to a similar degree in T2DM. Differences in aortic diameters due to decellularization occurred at lower pressures (0-75 mmHg) and converged with intact aortas at higher, physiological pressures (100-125 mmHg). In contrast, CRM decellularization caused increased internal diameter and incremental modulus only in the db/db mice, but unlike the aorta, the intact and decellularized CRM curves were more parallel. These data suggest that (1) micro-vessels may be more sensitive to early adverse consequences of diabetes than macro-vessels and (2) the ECM is a structural limit in aortas, but not CRMs.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Pressure myography<n-term>Type 2 diabetes<n-term>Vascular biomechanics<n-term><newabs>21043998<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM)-based scaffold materials have been used successfully in both preclinical and clinical tissue engineering and regenerative medicine approaches to tissue reconstruction. Results of numerous studies have shown that ECM scaffolds are capable of supporting the growth and differentiation of multiple cell types in vitro and of acting as inductive templates for constructive tissue remodeling after implantation in vivo. Adipose tissue represents a potentially abundant source of ECM and may represent an ideal substrate for the growth and adipogenic differentiation of stem cells harvested from this tissue. Numerous studies have shown that the methods by which ECM scaffold materials are prepared have a dramatic effect upon both the biochemical and structural properties of the resultant ECM scaffold material as well as the ability of the material to support a positive tissue remodeling outcome after implantation. The objective of the present study was to characterize the adipose ECM material resulting from three methods of decellularization to determine the most effective method for the derivation of an adipose tissue ECM scaffold that was largely free of potentially immunogenic cellular content while retaining tissue-specific structural and functional components as well as the ability to support the growth and adipogenic differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells. The results show that each of the decellularization methods produced an adipose ECM scaffold that was distinct from both a structural and biochemical perspective, emphasizing the importance of the decellularization protocol used to produce adipose ECM scaffolds. Further, the results suggest that the adipose ECM scaffolds produced using the methods described herein are capable of supporting the maintenance and adipogenic differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells and may represent effective substrates for use in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine approaches to soft tissue reconstruction.<newchar><newabs>25745770<newchar>Keloids are characterized by overgrowth of connective tissue in the skin that arises as a consequence of abnormal wound healing. Normal wound healing is regulated by a complex set of interactions within a network of profibrotic and antifibrotic cytokines that regulate new extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and remodeling. These proteins include transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) isoforms and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). TGFβ1 stimulates fibroblasts to synthesize and contract ECM and acts as a central mediator of profibrotic response. CTGF is induced by TGFβ1 and is considered a downstream mediator of TGFβ1action in fibroblasts. CTGF plays a crucial role in keloid pathogenesis by promoting prolonged collagen synthesis and deposition and as a consequence sustained fibrotic response. During keloids formation, besides imbalanced ECM synthesis and degradation, fibroblast proliferation and it's resistance to apoptosis is observed. Key genes that may play a role in keloid formation and growth involve: suppressor gene p53.,cyclin-depend- ent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A (p21) and BCL2 family genes: antiapoptotic BCL-2 and proapoptotic BAX. Genistein (4',5,7-trihydroxyisoflavone) exhibits multidirectional biological action. The concentration of genistein is relatively high in soybean. Genistein has been shown as effective antioxidant and chemopreventive agent. Genistein can bind to estrogen receptors (ERs) and modulate estrogen action due to its structure similarity to human estrogens. Genistein also inhibits transcription factors NFκB. Akt and AP-l signaling pathways, that are important for cytokines expression and cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and apoptosis. The aim of the study was to investigate genistein as a potential inhibitor of CTGF and TGFβ1, β2 and β3 isoforms expression and a potential regulator of p53. CDKN1A(p21), BAX and BCL-2 expression in normal fibroblasts and fibroblasts derived from keloids cultured in vitro. Real time RT-QPCR was used to estimate transcription level of selected genes in normal and keloid fibroblasts treated with genistein. Secreted/cell-associated CTGF protein was evaluated in cell growth's medium by ELISA. Total protein quantification was evaluated by fluorimetric assay in cells llsates (Quant-iT TM Protein Assay Kit). It was found that TGFβ1, β2 and β3 genes expression are decreased by genistein. Genistein suppresses the expression of CTGF mRNA and CTGF protein in a concentration dependent manner, p53 and p21 genes expression are modulated by genistein in concentration dependent manner. The agent also modulates BAX/BCL-2 ratio in examined cells in vitro.<newchar><newabs>26321510<newchar>Glaucoma is defined as a progressive optic neuropathy and is characterized by an irreversible loss of retinal ganglion cells. The main risk factor to develop glaucoma is an increased intraocular pressure (IOP). During the course of glaucoma structural changes in the optic nerve head (ONH) take place which lead to the characteristic excavation or cupping of the ONH. In this review we will focus on mechanisms and processes involved in structural alterations of the extracellular matrix in the lamina cribrosa (LC) of the ONH, which are associated with astrocytes. In glaucoma, a disordered deposition of elastic and collagen fibers and a typical pronounced thickening of the connective tissue septae surrounding the nerve fibers can be observed in the LC region. The remodeling process of the LC and the loss of ON axons are associated with a conversion of astrocytes from quiescent to a reactivated state. The extracellular matrix changes in the LC are thought to be due to a disturbed homeostatic balance of growth factors and the reactivated astrocytes are part of this process. Reactivated astrocytes, remodeling of the ECM within the LC and an elevated IOP are taking part in the retinal ganglion cell loss in glaucoma.<newchar>Astrocytes<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Glaucoma<n-term>Growth factors<n-term>Lamina cribrosa<n-term>Optic nerve head<n-term><newabs>23861322<newchar>Malignant gliomas are characterized by a diffuse infiltration into the surrounding brain parenchyma. Infiltrating glioma cells exist in close proximity with components of the tumor microenvironment, including the extracellular matrix (ECM). Whereas levels of collagens in the normal adult brain are low, in glioma, collagen levels are elevated and play a vital role in driving tumor progression. This article provides a comprehensive overview of the nature of collagens found in gliomas and offers unique insight into the mechanisms by which cancer cells interact with this ECM via cellular factors such as integrins, discoidin domain receptors, and mannose receptors. Also discussed are the major remodeling pathways of brain tumor collagen, mediated primarily by matrix metalloproteinases, and the reciprocal relationship between these enzymes and the collagen receptors. Finally, a concluding perspective is offered on how the biophysical properties of the collagen ECM, in particular, mechanical stiffness and compliance, influence malignant outcome. A better understanding of the complex molecular interactions between glioma cells and the collagen ECM will provide new avenues to combat the rampant tumor progression and chemoresistance in brain cancer patients.<newchar><newabs>22637153<newchar>Eicosanoids are lipid-signaling mediators released by many cells in response to various stimuli. Increasing evidence suggests that eicosanoids such as leukotrienes and prostaglandins (PGs) may directly mediate remodeling. In this study, we assessed whether these substances could alter extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and the inflammatory profiles of primary human airway smooth muscle cells (ASM) and fibroblasts. PGE(2) decreased both fibronectin and tenascin C in fibroblasts but only fibronectin in ASM. PGD(2) decreased both fibronectin and tenascin C in both ASM and fibroblasts, whereas PGF(2α) had no effect on ECM deposition. The selective PGI(2) analog, MRE-269, decreased fibronectin but not tenascin C in both cell types. All the PGs increased IL-6 and IL-8 release in a dose-dependent manner in ASM and fibroblasts. Changes in ECM deposition and cytokine release induced by prostaglandins in both ASM and fibroblasts were independent of an effect on cell number. Neither the acute nor repeated stimulation with leukotrienes had an effect on the deposition of ECM proteins or cytokine release from ASM or fibroblasts. We concluded that, collectively, these results provide evidence that PGs may contribute to ECM remodeling to a greater extent than leukotrienes in airway cells.<newchar><newabs>26320155<newchar>The Hippo pathway is comprised of a kinase cascade that involves mammalian Ste20-like serine/threonine kinases (MST1/2) and large tumor suppressor kinases (LATS1/2) and leads to inactivation of transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) and yes-associated protein (YAP). Protein stability and subcellular localization of TAZ/YAP determine its ability to regulate a diverse array of biological processes, including proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, stem/progenitor cell properties, organ size control, and tumorigenesis. These actions are enabled by interactions with various transcription factors or through cross talk with other signaling pathways. Interestingly, mechanical stress has been shown to be an upstream regulator of TAZ/YAP activity, and this finding provides a novel clue for understanding how mechanical forces influence a broad spectrum of biological processes, which involve cytoskeletal structure, cell adhesion, and extracellular matrix (ECM) organization. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) pathway is a critical component of lung development and the progression of lung diseases including emphysema, fibrosis, and cancer. In addition, TGF-β is a key regulator of ECM remodeling and cell differentiation processes such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of the Hippo pathway regarding lung development and diseases, with an emphasis on its interplay with TGF-β signaling.<newchar>Hippo<n-term>TAZ<n-term>TGF-β<n-term>TTF-1<n-term>YAP<n-term>emphysema<n-term>epithelial-mesenchymal transition<n-term>lung cancer<n-term>lung fibrosis<n-term>mechanotransduction<n-term><newabs>26473929<newchar>The tumor stroma acts as an essential microenvironment of the cancer cells, which includes many different types of non-cancerous cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Stromal fibroblasts (SFs) are the major cellular constituents of the tumor stroma and are often called cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). They are often characterized by α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) expression, which is indicative of the myofibroblast phenotype and strong contractility. These characteristics contribute to the remodeling and stiffening of the stromal ECM, thereby offering an appropriate field for cancer cell invasion. Importance of the tumor stroma in cancer progression has recently been highlighted. Moreover, several reports suggest that stromal fibroblasts interact with adjacent cancer cells through soluble factors, exosomes, or direct cell-cell adhesion to promote cancer cell invasion. In this review, current models of the regulation of cancer cell invasion by surrounding fibroblasts are summarized, including our recent work on the interaction between stromal fibroblasts and scirrhous gastric carcinoma (SGC) cells by using a three-dimensional (3D) culture system. Further mechanistic insights into the roles of the interaction between cancer cells and stromal fibroblasts in cancer invasion will be required to identify novel molecular targets for preventing cancer cell invasion.<newchar>cancer invasion<n-term>cancer-associated fibroblasts<n-term>peritoneal dissemination<n-term>scirrhous gastric carcinoma<n-term><newabs>23272801<newchar>Metastasis is the leading cause of death in cancer patients, and strategies to inhibit tumor cell invasion are a major focus of current efforts to develop cancer treatments. The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides both structural support and extracellular cues that regulate invasive tumor growth, and tumor-associated changes in ECM contribute to cancer progression. Integrins, the major receptors for cell adhesion to ECM, are important at every stage of cancer and occupy a critical position as transducers of chemical and mechanical signals that control tumor cell responses to ECM (i.e., outside-in signaling), as well as tumor-mediated changes to ECM that facilitate invasive growth and metastasis (i.e., inside-out signaling). Integrins are therefore attractive therapeutic targets for antagonistic agents. Here, we provide an overview of cancer-promoting functions of integrins on tumor cells, with a focus on roles in regulating cell invasion, ECM remodeling, tumor angiogenesis, and gene expression. We will also discuss how integrin functions are modulated by ECM ligands outside the cell, cytoskeletal/signaling proteins inside the cell, and other cell surface proteins. Finally, we will discuss current progress towards developing integrin antagonists for clinical use, including barriers that must still be overcome before integrins can be fully exploited as therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>25963329<newchar>Liver fibrosis results from chronic damage to the liver in conjunction with various pathways and is mediated by a complex microenvironment. Based on clinical observations, it is now evident that fibrosis is a dynamic, bidirectional process with an inherent capacity for recovery and remodeling. The major mechanisms involved in liver fibrosis include the repetitive injury of hepatocytes, the activation of the inflammatory response after injury stimulation, and the activation and proliferation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which represents the major extracellular matrix (ECM)-producing cells, stimulated by hepatocyte injury and inflammation. The microenvironment in the liver is synergistically regulated abnormal ECM deposition, scar formation, angiogenesis, and fibrogenesis. Moreover, recent studies have clarified novel mechanism in fibrosis such as epigenetic regulation of HSCs, the leptin and PPARγ pathways, the coagulation system, and even autophagy. Uncovering the mechanisms of liver fibrogenesis provides a basis to develop potential therapies to reverse and treat the fibrotic response, thereby improving the outcomes of patients with chronic liver disease. Although both scientific and clinical challenges remain, emerging studies attempt to reveal the ideal anti-fibrotic drug that could be easily delivered to the liver with high specificity and low toxicity. This review highlights the mechanisms, including novel pathways underlying fibrogenesis that may be translated into preventive and treatment strategies, reviews both current and novel agents that target specific pathways or multiple targets, and discusses novel drug delivery systems such as nanotechnology that can be applied in the treatment of liver fibrosis. In addition, we also discuss some current treatment strategies that are being applied in animal models and in clinical trials.<newchar>Clinical trials<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Hepatic stellate cells<n-term>Treatment strategy<n-term><newabs>12874440<newchar>Excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the kidney is the hallmark of diabetic nephropathy. Although the amount of ECM deposited in the kidney depends on the balance between the synthesis and degradation of ECM, the role of ECM degradation in matrix remodeling has been less well appreciated. High glucose, advanced glycation end products, angiotensin II, and TGF-beta1 all increase intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in renal cells and contribute to the development and progression of diabetic renal injury. The role of ROS in increased ECM synthesis has been well documented. ROS may also play a critical role in decreased ECM degradation by mediating high glucose- and TGF-beta1-induced inhibition of the proteolytic system, plasmin, and matrix metalloproteinases in the glomeruli. A recent observation suggests that ROS play an important role in tubulointerstitial fibrosis by mediating TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Accelerated ECM degradation is required to disrupt tubular basement membrane and complete EMT. ROS thus seem to be involved in both decreased and increased ECM degradation. It is not clear how cells determine when and where to increase or decrease ECM degradation in response to ROS. Precise definition of ROS-activated signaling pathways leading to ECM remodeling in the kidney will provide new strategies to prevent or treat diabetic renal injury.<newchar><newabs>24801728<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis is the pathological remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in response to stresses such as pressure overload or injury. While initially adaptive, myocardial remodeling and subsequent fibrosis causes increased wall stiffness, arrhythmias, cardiac dysfunction, and eventually heart failure. Though the disease processes and origins may differ, excess deposition of fibrillar collagens type I and III characterizes fibrosis in the heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, and skin. Under normal physiological conditions, high tensile strength collagen fibers maintain cardiac structural integrity, connect individual cardiomyocytes, transmit contractile force, and resist deformation and rupture of the ventricle during systole. Various factors contribute to the development of fibrosis by altering expression of ECM genes, including increased synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, alterations in the levels of circulating hormones, and mechanical strain resulting from ECM degradation. This review focuses on the transcriptional mechanisms governing expression of the major cardiac collagen, type I. Key cis- and trans-acting regulators of collagen I gene expression are discussed. Surprisingly, relatively few transcriptional regulators of collagen synthesis have been identified specifically in cardiac fibroblasts. However, key players have been identified in other tissue and cell types, and are important to consider in elucidating the molecular mechanisms underpinning collagen gene expression in the heart in both health and disease.<newchar><newabs>24987377<newchar>One percent of infants are born with congenital heart disease (CHD), which commonly involves outflow tract (OFT) defects. These infants often require complex surgeries, which are associated with long term adverse remodeling effects, and receive replacement valves with limited strength, biocompatibility, and growth capability. To address these problematic issues, researchers have carried out investigations in valve development and valve mechanics. A longstanding hypothesis is that flow-induced forces regulate fibrous valve development, however, the specific mechanisms behind this mechanotransduction remain unclear. The purpose of this study was to implement an in vitro system of outflow tract development to test the response of embryonic OFT tissues to fluid flow. A dynamic, three-dimensional bioreactor system was used to culture embryonic OFT tissue under different levels of flow as well as the absence of flow. In the absence of flow, OFT tissues took on a more primitive phenotype that is characteristic of early OFT cushion development where widely dispersed mesenchymal cells are surrounded by a sparse, disorganized extracellular matrix (ECM). Whereas OFT tissues subjected to physiologically matched flow formed compact mounds of cells, initated, fibrous ECM development, while prolonged supraphysiological flow resulted in abnormal tissue remodeling. This study indicates that both the timing and magnitude of flow alter cellular processes that determine if OFT precursor tissue undergoes normal or pathological development. Specifically, these experiments showed that flow-generated forces regulate the deposition and localization of fibrous ECM proteins, indicating that mechanosensitive signaling pathways are capable of driving pathological OFT development if flows are not ideal.<newchar>bioreactor<n-term>fibrotic development<n-term>hemodynamics<n-term>mechanotransduction<n-term>outflow tract<n-term><newabs>24714132<newchar>Invadopodia are actin-based protrusions of the plasma membrane that penetrate into the extracellular matrix (ECM), and enzymatically degrade it. Invadopodia and podosomes, often referred to, collectively, as &quot;invadosomes,&quot; are actin-based membrane protrusions that facilitate matrix remodeling and cell invasion across tissues, processes that occur under specific physiological conditions such as bone remodeling, as well as under pathological states such as bone, immune disorders, and cancer metastasis. In this review, we specifically focus on the functional architecture of invadopodia in cancer cells; we discuss here three functional domains of invadopodia responsible for the metalloproteinase-based degradation of the ECM, the cytoskeleton-based mechanical penetration into the matrix, and the integrin adhesome-based adhesion to the ECM. We will describe the structural and molecular organization of each domain and the cross-talk between them during the invasion process.<newchar>cancer metastasis<n-term>cell adhesion<n-term>cytoskeleton<n-term>invadopodia<n-term>invasion<n-term>metalloproteinases<n-term><newabs>24381086<newchar>Infectious agents including viruses can infect the heart muscle, resulting in the development of heart inflammation called myocarditis. Chronic myocarditis can lead to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). DCM develops from the extensive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling caused by myocarditis and may result in heart failure. Epidemiological data for viral myocarditis has long suggested a worse pathology in males, with more recent data demonstrating sex-dependent pathogenesis in DCM as well. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), long known modulators of the extracellular matrix, have important roles in mediating heart inflammation and remodeling during disease and in convalescence. This ability of MMPs to control both the inflammatory response and ECM remodeling during myocarditis makes them potential drug targets. In this review, we analyze the role of MMPs in mediating myocarditis/DCM disease progression, their sex-dependent expression, and their potential as drug targets during viral myocarditis and DCM.<newchar><newabs>26486174<newchar>Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and the extracellular matrix (ECM) are intimately associated in the aortic wall. Fbln4(SMKO) mice with an SMC-specific deletion of the Fbln4 gene, which encodes the vascular ECM component fibulin-4, develop ascending aortic aneurysms that have increased abundance of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE); inhibiting angiotensin II signaling within the first month of life prevents aneurysm development. We used comparative proteomics analysis of Fbln4(SMKO) aortas from postnatal day (P) 1 to P30 mice to identify key molecules involved in aneurysm initiation and expansion. At P14, the actin depolymerizing factor cofilin was dephosphorylated and thus activated, and at P7, the abundance of slingshot-1 (SSH1) phosphatase, an activator of cofilin, was increased, leading to actin cytoskeletal remodeling. Also, by P7, biomechanical changes and underdeveloped elastic lamina-SMC connections were evident, and the abundance of early growth response 1 (Egr1), a mechanosensitive transcription factor that stimulates ACE expression, was increased, which was before the increases in ACE abundance and cofilin activation. Postnatal deletion of Fbln4 in SMCs at P7 prevented cofilin activation and aneurysm formation, suggesting that these processes required disruption of elastic lamina-SMC connections. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is involved in the angiotensin II-mediated activation of SSH1, and administration of PI3K inhibitors from P7 to P30 decreased SSH1 abundance and prevented aneurysms. These results suggest that aneurysm formation arises from abnormal mechanosensing of SMCs resulting from the loss of elastic lamina-SMC connections and from increased SSH1 and cofilin activity, which may be potential therapeutic targets for treating ascending aortic aneurysms.<newchar><newabs>24616631<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is essential for facilitating developmental processes. ECM remodeling, accomplished by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), is regulated by endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). While the TIMP N-terminal domain is involved in inhibition of MMP activity, the C-terminal domain exhibits cell-signaling activity, which is TIMP and cell type dependent. We have previously examined the distinct roles of the Xenopus laevis TIMP-2 and -3 C-terminal domains during development and here examined the unique roles of TIMP-1 N- and C-terminal domains in early X. laevis embryos. mRNA microinjection was used to overexpress full-length TIMP-1 or its individual N- or C-terminal domains in embryos. Full-length and C-terminal TIMP-1 resulted in increased lethality compared to N-terminal TIMP-1. Overexpression of C-terminal TIMP-1 resulted in significant decreases in mRNA levels of proteolytic genes including TIMP-2, RECK, MMP-2, and MMP-9, corresponding to decreases in MMP-2 and -9 protein levels, as well as decreased MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities. These trends were not observed with the N-terminus. Our research suggests that the individual domains of TIMP-1 are capable of playing distinct roles in regulating the ECM proteolytic network during development and that the unique functions of these domains are moderated in the endogenous full-length TIMP-1 molecule.<newchar><newabs>26565765<newchar>OBJECT An in vitro study was performed to understand the potential roles of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 in the elastin degradation of human ligamentum flavum (LF) cells via treatment with tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β). Previous studies have identified a decreased elastin to collagen ratio in hypertrophic LF. Among the extracellular matrix remodeling endopeptidases, MMP-2 and MMP-9 are known to have elastolytic activity. The hypothesis that activated LF cells exposed to inflammation would secrete MMP-2 and MMP-9, thereby resulting in elastin degradation, was examined. METHODS To examine MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression in human LF, cells were isolated and cultured from LF tissues that were obtained during lumbar disc surgery. Isolated LF cells were equally divided into 3 flasks and subcultured. Upon cellular confluency, the LF cells were treated with TNFα, IL-1β, or none (as a control) and incubated for 48 hours. The conditioned media were collected and assayed for MMP-2 and MMP-9 using gelatin zymography and Western blot analysis. The electrophoresis bands were compared on densitometric scans using ImageJ software. RESULTS The conditioned media from the isolated human LF cells naturally expressed 72-kD and 92-kD gelatinolytic activities on gelatin zymography. The IL-1β-treated LF cells presented sustained increases in the proenzyme/zymogen forms of MMP-2 and -9 (proMMP-2 and proMMP-9), and activeMMP-9 expression (p = 0.001, 0.022, and 0.036, respectively); the TNFα-treated LF cells showed the most elevated proMMP9 secretion (p = 0.006), as determined by Western blot analyses. ActiveMMP-2 expression was not observed on zymography or the Western blot analysis. CONCLUSIONS TNFα and IL-1β promote proMMP-2 and proMMP-9 secretion. IL-1β appears to activate proMMP-9 in human LF cells. Based on these findings, selective MMP-9 blockers or antiinflammatory drugs could be potential treatment options for LF hypertrophy.<newchar>ECM = extracellular matrix<n-term>EDTA = ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid<n-term>FBS = fetal bovine serum<n-term>HBSS = Hank’s balanced saline solution<n-term>IL-1β = interleukin-1β<n-term>LF = ligamentum flavum<n-term>MMP = matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>P/S = penicillin/streptomycin<n-term>SDS-PAGE = sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis<n-term>TIMP = tissue inhibitor of the metalloproteinase<n-term>TNFα = tumor necrosis factor−α<n-term>elastin degradation<n-term>interleukin-1β<n-term>ligamentum flavum cells<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase−2<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase−9<n-term>proMMP = proenzyme/zymogen form of MMP<n-term>tumor necrosis factor-α<n-term><newabs>24095877<newchar>Sustained induction and activation of matrixins (matrix metalloproteinases or MMPs), and the destruction and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), are the hallmarks of cardiac fibrosis. The reversion-inducing-cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs (RECK) is a unique membrane-anchored endogenous MMP regulator. We hypothesized that elevated angiotensin II (Ang II), which is associated with fibrosis in the heart, differentially regulates MMPs and RECK both in vivo and in vitro. Continuous infusion of Ang II into male C57Bl/6 mice for 2weeks resulted in cardiac fibrosis, with increased expressions of MMPs 2, 7, 9 and 14, and of collagens Ia1 and IIIa1. The expression of RECK, however, was markedly suppressed. These effects were inhibited by co-treatment with the Ang II type 1 receptor (AT1) antagonist losartan. In vitro, Ang II suppressed RECK expression in adult mouse cardiac fibroblasts (CF) via AT1/Nox4-dependent ERK/Sp1 activation, but induced MMPs 2, 14 and 9 via NF-κB, AP-1 and/or Sp1 activation. Further, while forced expression of RECK inhibits, its knockdown potentiates Ang II-induced CF migration. Notably, RECK overexpression reduced Ang II-induced MMPs 2, 9 and 14 activation, but enhanced collagens Ia1 and IIIa1 expression and soluble collagen release. These results demonstrate for the first time that Ang II suppresses RECK, but induces MMPs both in vivo and in vitro, and RECK overexpression blunts Ang II-induced MMP activation and CF migration in vitro. Strategies that upregulate RECK expression in vivo have the potential to attenuate sustained MMP expression, and blunt fibrosis and adverse remodeling in hypertensive heart diseases.<newchar>12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate<n-term>3-(4,5-dimethythiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide<n-term>ADAM<n-term>AP-1<n-term>ARB<n-term>AT1<n-term>AT2<n-term>Adverse remodeling<n-term>CF<n-term>CMV<n-term>CVD<n-term>Cardiac fibrosis<n-term>DPI<n-term>ECM<n-term>EGFP<n-term>ERK<n-term>Elk<n-term>Ets-like protein<n-term>GAPDH<n-term>GFP<n-term>GPI<n-term>JNK<n-term>LV<n-term>MAPK<n-term>MMP<n-term>MOI<n-term>MT1-MMP<n-term>MTT<n-term>NADPH<n-term>NADPH oxidase<n-term>NF-κB<n-term>Nox<n-term>Nox4<n-term>RECK<n-term>ROS<n-term>SBP<n-term>Sp1<n-term>TACE<n-term>TIMP<n-term>TPA<n-term>TPA DNA response element<n-term>TRE<n-term>UTR<n-term>WT<n-term>a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain<n-term>activator protein-1<n-term>angiotensin II type 1 receptor<n-term>angiotensin II type II receptor<n-term>angiotensin receptor blockers<n-term>c-Jun amino-terminal kinase<n-term>cardiac fibroblasts<n-term>cardiovascular disease<n-term>cytomegalovirus<n-term>diphenylene iodonium<n-term>enhanced green fluorescent protein<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular signal-regulated kinase<n-term>glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase<n-term>glycophosphatidylinositol<n-term>green fluorescent protein<n-term>left ventricle<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>membrane type 1-MMP<n-term>mitogen-activated protein kinase<n-term>multiplicity of infection<n-term>nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate<n-term>nuclear factor kappa B<n-term>reactive oxygen species<n-term>reversion-inducing-cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs<n-term>shRNA<n-term>short hairpin RNA<n-term>siMMP<n-term>small inhibitory RNA against MMP<n-term>specific protein 1<n-term>systolic blood pressure<n-term>tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase<n-term>tumor necrosis factor, alpha, converting enzyme<n-term>untranslated region<n-term>wild-type<n-term><newabs>19799912<newchar>Unraveling the biological role of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) during cardiac remodeling and the progression of heart failure has proven to be an enormous challenge. Remodeling of the cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM), regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors, TIMPs, is a well-established paradigm in cardiac health and disease. Originally, TIMPs were thought to function exclusively as endogenous inhibitors of MMP activity, thereby fine-tuning MMP-mediated ECM degradation and numerous related processes. However, during the last two decades, the concept of MMP-independent TIMP-mediated receptor signaling and regulation of cell fate has emerged. Although our current knowledge is still limited, in this review, we highlight some of the novel data, illustrating the MMP-independent biological properties of the four TIMP family members. Moreover, we discuss how these cell-specific insights may contribute to the process of cardiac remodeling, disease and failure. Finally, we identify where additional research is needed that will codetermine the possible future of TIMPs as therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>26321909<newchar>Conservation of a patient's residual hearing and prevention of fibrous tissue/new bone formation around an electrode array are some of the major challenges in cochlear implant (CI) surgery. Although it is well-known that fibrotic tissue formation around the electrode array can interfere with hearing performance in implanted patients, and that associated intracochlear inflammation can initiate loss of residual hearing, little is known about the molecular and cellular mechanisms that promote this response in the cochlea. In vitro studies in neonatal rats and in vivo studies in adult mice were performed to gain insight into the pro-inflammatory, proliferative, and remodeling phases of pathological wound healing that occur in the cochlea following an electrode analog insertion. Resident Schwann cells (SC), macrophages, and fibroblasts had a prominent role in the inflammatory process in the cochlea. Leukocytes were recruited to the cochlea following insertion of a nylon filament in adult mice, where contributed to the inflammatory response. The reparative stages in wound healing are characterized by persistent neuro-inflammation of spiral ganglion neurons (SGN) and expression of regenerative monocytes/macrophages in the cochlea. Accordingly, genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and remodeling were up-regulated in implanted cochleae. Maturation of scar tissue occurs in the remodeling phase of wound healing in the cochlea. Similar to other damaged peripheral nerves, M2 macrophages and de-differentiated SC were observed in damaged cochleae and may play a role in cell survival and axonal regeneration. In conclusion, the insertion of an electrode analog into the cochlea is associated with robust early and chronic inflammatory responses characterized by recruitment of leukocytes and expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines that promote intracochlear fibrosis and loss of the auditory hair cells (HC) and SGN important for hearing after CI surgery.<newchar>Schwann cells<n-term>cochlea<n-term>cochlear implant<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>macrophages<n-term>neuro-inflammation<n-term>pathology<n-term>spiral ganglion neurons<n-term><newabs>25459137<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases are zinc-containing endopeptidases that are involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling cascade in many neurological disorders, including cerebral ischemia (CI). Remodeling of the ECM followed by disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is one of the major factors contributing to the ultimate neurodegeneration in CI. BBB disruption causes a cascade of pathophysiologies that trigger Anoikis-like cell death. While inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 decreases the extent of neuronal damage in CI, MMP-2/9 knock-out mice have reduced infarct volume in experimental animal models of CI. Piroxicam, which is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), has been demonstrated to be protective against aquaporin-4 and acid-sensing ion channel 1a--mediated neurodegeneration in CI. However, no report exists on the inhibitory action of Piroxicam on MMPs. We tested the hypothesis that Piroxicam, with its larger molecular size and more number of interacting pharmacophores, can inhibit MMP-2 and MMP-9. A comparative study on the inhibitory potential of Piroxicam with other reported MMP-inhibitors, viz., Aspirin, Melatonin and Doxycycline, has also been performed. Since the drug has already been reported to be neuroprotective through its inhibitory action in other pathways, it can be the drug of choice in the therapeutic management and prevention of neurodegeneration in CI.<newchar><newabs>25185755<newchar>Pulmonary arterial remodeling is characterized by excessive proliferation, migration, and pro-differentiation and fibrotic activation of adventitial fibroblasts in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) process. Several lines of evidence indicate that serotonin (5-HT) plays a central role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial remodeling. In the present study, we investigated whether 5-HT is directly involved in the functional regulation of pulmonary artery adventitial fibroblasts (PAFs). Incubation of cultured rat PAFs with 5-HT caused a dose-dependent stimulation of cell proliferation, migration activity, and a time-dependent increase of α-SMA expression, a marker of fibroblast differentiation into myofibroblasts, and adventitia fibrosis, evaluating connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and extracellular matrix (ECM) mRNAs and proteins. These effects were attenuated by the 5-HT2A receptor antagonist, ketanserin and mimicked by the 5-HT2A receptor agonist DOI. 5-HT-induced fibroblasts phenotypic alterations and ECM accumulation were dependent on stimulation of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 as demonstrated using a neutralizing antibody. 5-HT also caused Smad3 phosphorylation and ketanserin diminished 5-HT-induced Smad3 activation. These results demonstrated that 5-HT can directly activate PAFs through 5-HT2A receptor and promote fibroblasts phenotypic alterations and adventitia fibrosis depending on the signaling of the TGF-β1/Smad3 pathway.<newchar><newabs>16601241<newchar>Airway wall remodeling is a hallmark of asthma, characterized by subepithelial thickening and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Mechanical stress due to hyperresponsive smooth muscle cells may contribute to this remodeling, but its relevance in a three-dimensional environment (where the ECM plays an important role in modulating stresses felt by cells) is unclear. To characterize the effects of dynamic compression in ECM remodeling in a physiologically relevant three-dimensional environment, a tissue-engineered human airway wall model with differentiated bronchial epithelial cells atop a collagen gel containing lung fibroblasts was used. Lateral compressive strain of 10 or 30% at 1 or 60 cycles per hour was applied using a novel straining device. ECM remodeling was assessed by immunohistochemistry and zymography. Dynamic strain, particularly at the lower magnitude, induced airway wall remodeling, as indicated by increased deposition of types III and IV collagen and increased secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9. These changes paralleled increased myofibroblast differentiation and were fibroblast-dependent. Furthermore, the spatial pattern of type III collagen deposition correlated with that of myofibroblasts; both were concentrated near the epithelium and decreased diffusely away from the surface, indicating some epithelial control of the remodeling response. Thus, in a physiologically relevant three-dimensional model of the bronchial wall, dynamic compressive strain induced tissue remodeling that mimics many features of remodeling seen in asthma, in the absence of inflammation and dependent on epithelial-fibroblast signaling.<newchar><newabs>26173873<newchar>Animals use a stereotypical set of developmental genes to build body architectures of varying sizes and organizational complexity. Some genes are critical to developmental patterning, while other genes are important to physiological control of growth. However, growth regulator genes may not be as important in small-bodied &quot;micro-metazoans&quot; such as nematodes. Nematodes use a simplified developmental strategy of lineage-based cell fate specifications to produce an adult bilaterian body composed of a few hundreds of cells. Nematodes also lost the MYC proto-oncogenic regulator of cell proliferation. To identify additional regulators of cell proliferation that were lost with MYC, we computationally screened and determined 839 high-confidence genes that are conserved in bilaterians/lost in nematodes (CIBLIN genes). We find that 30 % of all CIBLIN genes encode transcriptional regulators of cell proliferation, epithelial-to-mesenchyme transitions, and other processes. Over 50 % of CIBLIN genes are unnamed genes in Drosophila, suggesting that there are many understudied genes. Interestingly, CIBLIN genes include many Myc synthetic lethal (MycSL) hits from recent screens. CIBLIN genes include key regulators of heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) sulfation patterns, and lysyl oxidases involved in cross-linking and modification of the extracellular matrix (ECM). These genes and others suggest the CIBLIN repertoire services critical functions in ECM remodeling and cell migration in large-bodied bilaterians. Correspondingly, CIBLIN genes are co-expressed with Myc in cancer transcriptomes, and include a preponderance of known determinants of cancer progression and tumor aggression. We propose that CIBLIN gene research can improve our understanding of regulatory control of cellular growth in metazoans.<newchar>Apoptosis<n-term>Cancer<n-term>Cell migration<n-term>Cell proliferation<n-term>Comparative genomics<n-term>Genetic screens<n-term>Mnt<n-term>Myc<n-term>Myc synthetic lethals (MycSL genes)<n-term><newabs>26167673<newchar>Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), also known as osteonectin or BM-40, is the prototypical matricellular protein. Matricellular proteins are nonstructural secreted proteins that provide an integration between cells and their surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Regulation of the ECM is important in maintaining the physiologic function of tissues. Elevated levels of SPARC have been identified in a variety of diseases involving pathologic tissue remodeling, such as hepatic fibrosis, systemic sclerosis, and certain carcinomas. Within the eye, SPARC has been identified in the trabecular meshwork, lens, and retina. Studies have begun to show the role of SPARC in these tissues and its possible role, specifically in primary open-angle glaucoma, cataracts, and proliferative vitreoretinopathy. SPARC may, therefore, be a therapeutic target in the treatment of certain ocular diseases. Further investigation into the mechanism of action of SPARC will be necessary in the development of SPARC-targeted therapy.<newchar><newabs>21244824<newchar>Reductionist in vitro model systems which mimic specific extracellular matrix functions in a highly controlled manner, termed artificial extracellular matrices (aECM), have increasingly been used to elucidate the role of cell-ECM interactions in regulating cell fate. To better understand the interplay of biophysical and biochemical effectors in controlling three-dimensional cell migration, a poly(ethylene glycol)-based aECM platform was used in this study to explore the influence of matrix cross-linking density, represented here by stiffness, on cell migration in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, the migration behavior of single preosteoblastic cells within hydrogels of varying stiffness and susceptibilities to degradation by matrix metalloproteases was assessed by time-lapse microscopy. Migration behavior was seen to be strongly dependent on matrix stiffness, with two regimes identified: a nonproteolytic migration mode dominating at relatively low matrix stiffness and proteolytic migration at higher stiffness. Subsequent in vivo experiments revealed a similar stiffness dependence of matrix remodeling, albeit less sensitive to the matrix metalloprotease sensitivity. Therefore, our aECM model system is well suited to unveil the role of biophysical and biochemical determinants of physiologically relevant cell migration phenomena.<newchar><newabs>25337249<newchar>Lysyl oxidase (LOX) has been reported to regulate tumor metastasis and has been found to involve in modification of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the context of tumorigenesis. The aim of this study is to determine the prognostic significance of LOX in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and to examine the correlation between LOX expression and ECM remodeling-associated MMP2/MMP9 in NSCLC tissues. The mRNA expression of LOX, MMP2 and MMP9 was investigated by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in 30 NSCLC patients. The protein expression of LOX was measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 110 paraffin-embedded tissues with NSCLC and the protein expression of MMP2/MMP9 was measured by in 30 NSCLC patients. The correlation between LOX expression and clinical parameters and MMP2/MMP9 was analyzed by appropriate statistics. The Kaplan-Meier method, univariate and multivariate regression analysis was used to analyze the correlation between LOX expression and overall survival (OS). The relative mRNA expression or protein expression of LOX were significantly higher in NSCLC tumor tissues than in the corresponding noncancerous tissues (P &lt; 0.05). High LOX expression was significantly associated with MMP2, MMP9, tumor size, lymph node metastasis, pathological stage and OS (P &lt; 0.05). Univariate and multivariate analysis showed that LOX was an independent prognostic factor for OS. Our results indicate that LOX may play a role in the metastasis of NSCLC by promoting MMP2/MMP9 expression. LOX expression is an independent prognostic factor in OS in NSCLC.<newchar>ECM<n-term>LOX<n-term>NSCLC<n-term>prognosis<n-term><newabs>25735873<newchar>The development of the mammary gland involves formation of a branched arboreal structure resulting from the penetration and proliferation of epithelial cells into the fat pad. The mammary cells invade by remodeling their surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM), which are rich in proteins, and glycans such as heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs). There is increasing literature on how the interaction between signaling by ECM and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is relevant to morphogenetic and physiological contexts. Here we sought to understand how heparanase, the sole mammalian heparan sulfate-degrading endoglycosidase may regulate mammary gland development. We found a robust localization of heparanase within growing end buds during branching in vivo. Using three-dimensional (3D) organotypic cultures, we showed that heparanase expression and activity are required for mammary epithelial invasion/branching within dense collagen I gels. Morphometric analysis of glands from both heparanase-overexpressing and knockout mice showed a direct correlation between degree of branching and the heparanase levels, confirming our 3D organotypic culture observations. Finally, we uncovered a reciprocal association between levels of heparanase and MMP14, a membrane-bound MMP, shedding further light on how branching occurs within developing mammary glands.<newchar>BRANCHING MORPHOGENESIS<n-term>HEPARANASE<n-term>MAMMARY GLAND<n-term>MMP-14<n-term><newabs>21302298<newchar>A number of pro-fibrogenic stimuli, such as growth factors, cytokines, and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, involve Akt and its downstream substrates in mediating their effects. We previously reported that absence of Akt1, which is the predominant isoform of the three gene Akt family in vascular cells, resulted in impaired ECM remodeling in skin and vasculature. In the current study, we investigated the importance of Akt1 in TGFβ- and bleomycin-induced synthesis and secretion of ECM proteins by fibroblasts. We observed that both TGFβ and bleomycin stimulated the synthesis of ECM proteins in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Treatment with TGFβ and bleomycin also resulted in increased phosphorylation of Akt, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and their downstream signaling partners, p70S6 Kinase, Ribosomal S6 protein and 4E-BP1, resulting in the activation of this pathway. The effects of TGFβ and bleomycin on ECM synthesis were blunted by pre-treatment with an mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. Whereas mTOR is responsible for the transcriptional regulation of a number of ECM proteins, adhesion molecules and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), synthesis of major ECM proteins such as fibronectin and collagens (types I, II and V) by fibroblasts in response to TGFβ and bleomycin is regulated by mTOR at the translational level. These findings indicate the importance of the Akt-mTOR signaling pathway in TGF-mediated fibrogenic events in vivo.<newchar><newabs>26384829<newchar>Fibroblasts play an important role in the wound-healing process by generating extracellular matrix (ECM) and undergoing differentiation into myofibroblasts, but these cells can also be involved in pathologic remodeling of tissue. Nascent ECM provides a substrate for re-epithelialization to occur, restoring damaged tissue to a functional state. Dysregulation of this process can result in fibrosis--stiffening and scarring of the tissue. Current treatments cannot halt or reverse this process. The molecular mechanisms underlying fibrotic dysregulation are poorly understood, providing an untapped pool of potential therapeutic targets. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and adhesion signaling are involved in inducing fibroblast differentiation into α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) expressing myofibroblasts, while prostaglandin E₂ (PGE₂) has been shown to antagonize TGF-β signaling; however, the temporal and mechanistic details of this relationship have not yet been fully characterized. We measured αSMA, a marker of fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation, as a function of: TGF-β1 receptor-ligand complex internalization, PGE₂ binding, and adhesion signaling and developed a mathematical model capturing the molecular mechanisms of fibroblast differentiation. Using our model, we predict the following: Periodic dosing with PGE₂ temporarily renders fibroblasts incapable of differentiation and refractory to additional TGF-β1 stimulation; conversely, periodic dosing with TGF-β1 in the presence of PGE₂ induces a reduced signal response that can be further inhibited by the addition of more PGE₂. Controlled fibroblast differentiation is necessary for effective wound healing; however, excessive accumulation of αSMA-expressing myofibroblasts can result in fibrosis. Homeostasis of αSMA in our model requires a balance of positive and negative regulatory signals. Sensitivity analysis predicts that PGE₂ availability, TGF-β1 availability, and the rate of TGF-β1 receptor recycling each highly influence the rates of αSMA production. With this model, we are able to demonstrate that regulation of both TGF-β1 and PGE₂ signaling levels is essential for preventing fibroblast dysregulation.<newchar>Mathematical model<n-term><newabs>26119510<newchar>Candidate cell sources for vocal fold scar treatment include mesenchymal stromal cells from bone marrow (BM-MSC) and adipose tissue (AT-MSC). Mechanosensitivity of MSC can alter highly relevant aspects of their behavior, yet virtually nothing is known about how MSC might respond to the dynamic mechanical environment of the larynx. Our objective was to evaluate MSC as a potential cell source for vocal fold tissue engineering in a mechanically relevant context. A vibratory strain bioreactor and cDNA microarray were used to evaluate the similarity of AT-MSC and BM-MSC to the native cell source, vocal fold fibroblasts (VFF). Posterior probabilities for each of the microarray transcripts fitting into specific expression patterns were calculated, and the data were analyzed for Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment. Significant wound healing and cell differentiation GO terms are reported. In addition, proliferation and apoptosis were evaluated with immunohistochemistry. Results revealed that VFF shared more GO terms related to epithelial development, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, growth factor activity, and immune response with BM-MSC than with AT-MSC. Similarity in glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan activity dominated the ECM analysis. Analysis of GO terms relating to MSC differentiation toward osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic lineages revealed that BM-MSC expressed fewer osteogenesis GO terms in the vibrated and scaffold-only conditions compared to polystyrene. We did not evaluate if vibrated BM-MSC recover osteogenic expression markers when returned to polystyrene culture. Immunostaining for Ki67 and cleaved caspase 3 did not vary with cell type or mechanical condition. We conclude that VFF may have a more similar wound healing capacity to BM-MSC than to AT-MSC in response to short-term vibratory strain. Furthermore, BM-MSC appear to lose osteogenic potential in the vibrated and scaffold-only conditions compared to polystyrene, potentially attenuating the risk of osteogenesis for in vivo applications.<newchar><newabs>22170596<newchar>Ultrasound imaging allows in vivo assessment of tracheal kinetics and cartilage structure. To date, the impact of mechanical ventilation (MV) on extracellular matrix (ECM) in airway cartilage is unclear, but an indication of its functional and structural change may support the development of protective therapies. The objective of this study was to characterize changes in mechanical properties of the neonatal airway during MV with alterations in cartilage ECM. Trachea segments were isolated in a neonatal lamb model; ultrasound dimensions and pressure-volume relationships were measured on sham (no MV; n = 6) and MV (n = 7) airways for 4 hr. Tracheal cross-sections were harvested at 4 hr, tissues were fixed and stained, and Fourier transform infrared imaging spectroscopy (FT-IRIS) was performed. Over 4 hr of MV, bulk modulus (28%) and elastic modulus (282%) increased. The MV tracheae showed higher collagen, proteoglycan content, and collagen integrity (new tissue formation); whereas no changes were seen in the controls. These data are clinically relevant in that airway properties can be correlated with MV and changes in cartilage ECM. MV increases the in vivo dimensions of the trachea and is associated with evidence of airway tissue remodeling. Injury to the neonatal airway from MV may have relevance for the development of tracheomalacia. We demonstrated active airway tissue remodeling during MV using an FT-IRIS technique which identifies changes in ECM.<newchar><newabs>22522284<newchar>It is widely held that bone architecture is finely regulated in accordance with homeostatic requirements. Aberrant remodelling (hyperdensification and/or cyst formation in the immediately subchondral region) has previously been described in bone underlying cartilage in arthropathies. The present study examined the trabecular architecture of samples of bone, initially in the severe osteoarthropathy of alkaptonuria, but subsequently in osteoarthritis using a combination of light microscopy, 3D scanning electron microscopy and quantitative backscattered electron scanning electron microscopy. We report an extraordinary and previously unrecognised bone phenotype in both disorders, including novel microanatomical structures. The underlying subchondral trabecular bone contained idiosyncratic architecture. Trabecular surfaces had numerous outgrowths that we have termed &quot;trabecular excrescences&quot;, of which three distinct types were recognised. The first type arose from incomplete resorption of branching secondary trabeculae arising from the deposition of immature (woven) bone in prior marrow space. These were characterised by very deeply scalloped surfaces and rugged edges. The second type had arisen in a similar way but been smoothed over by new bone deposition. The third type, which resembled coarse stucco, probably arises from resting surfaces that had been focally reactivated. These were poorly integrated with the prior trabecular wall. We propose that these distinctive microanatomical structures are indicative of abnormal osteoclast/osteoblast modelling in osteoarthropathies, possibly secondary to altered mechanical loading or other aberrant signalling. Identification of the mechanisms underlying the formation of trabecular excrescences will contribute to a better understanding of the role of aberrant bone remodelling in arthropathies and development of new therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>24279676<newchar>Repairing damaged tissues is an essential homeostatic mechanism that enables clearance of dead or damaged cells after injury, and the maintenance of tissue integrity. However, exaggeration of this process in the lung can lead to the development of fibrotic scar tissue. This is characterized by excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as fibronectin, proteoglycans, hyaluronic acid, and interstitial collagens. After tissue injury, or a breakdown of tissue integrity, a cascade of events unfolds to maintain normal tissue homeostasis. Inflammatory mediators are released from injured epithelium, leading to both platelet activation and inflammatory cell migration. Inflammatory cells are capable of releasing multiple pro-inflammatory and fibrogenic mediators such as transforming growth factor (TGF)β and interleukin (IL)-13, which can trigger myofibroblast proliferation and recruitment. The myofibroblast population is also expanded as a result of epithelial cells undergoing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and of the activation of resident fibroblasts, leading to ECM deposition and tissue remodeling. In the healthy lung, wound healing then proceeds to restore the normal architecture of the lung; however, fibrosis can develop when the wound is severe, the tissue injury persists, or the repair process becomes dysregulated. Understanding the processes regulating aberrant wound healing and the matrix in the chronic fibrotic lung disease idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), is key to identifying new treatments for this chronic debilitating disease. This review focuses primarily on the emerging role of enzymes in the lungs of patients with IPF. Elevated expression of a number of enzymes that can directly modulate the ECM has been reported, and recent data indicates that modulating the activity of these enzymes can have a downstream effect on fibrotic tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>25704664<newchar>Long-bone growth by endochondral ossification is cooperatively accomplished by chondrocyte proliferation, hypertrophic differentiation, and appropriate secretion of collagens, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans into the extracellular matrix (ECM). Before folding and entering the secretory pathway, ECM macromolecules in general are subject to extensive posttranslational modification, orchestrated by chaperone complexes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). ERp57 is a member of the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family and facilitates correct folding of newly synthesized glycoproteins by rearrangement of native disulfide bonds. Here, we show that ERp57-dependent PDI activity is essential for postnatal skeletal growth, especially during the pubertal growth spurt characterized by intensive matrix deposition. Loss of ERp57 in growth plates of cartilage-specific ERp57 knockout mice (ERp57 KO) results in ER stress, unfolded protein response (UPR), reduced proliferation, and accelerated apoptotic cell death of chondrocytes. Together this results in a delay of long-bone growth with the following characteristics: (1) enlarged growth plates; (2) expanded hypertrophic zones; (3) retarded osteoclast recruitment; (4) delayed remodeling of the proteoglycan-rich matrix; and (5) reduced numbers of bone trabeculae. All the growth plate and bone abnormalities, however, become attenuated after the pubertal growth spurt, when protein synthesis is decelerated and, hence, ERp57 function is less essential.<newchar>ENDOCHONDRAL OSSIFICATION<n-term>ER STRESS<n-term>ERP57<n-term>GROWTH PLATE<n-term>PUBERTY<n-term><newabs>26904131<newchar>Previous studies indicate that extracellular matrix (ECM) disorders lead to the apoptosis of Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells (VSMCs), which impairs the aortic wall by reducing the generation of elastic fibers, and ultimately result in ascending aortic aneurysm. The critical role of the Yes-associated protein (YAP) has been elucidated in cardiac/SMC proliferation during cardiovascular development. However, the association of YAP expression and extracellular matrix disorders in ascending aortic aneurysms is not clear. Here, we present for the first time that the downregulation of YAP in VSMCs is associated with ECM disorders of the media in ascending aortic aneurysms. We found that aortic ECM deteriorated with increased apoptotic VSMCs. Moreover, expression of YAP was dramatically reduced in the aortic walls of patients with ascending aortic aneurysms, while the normal aortic samples exhibited abundant YAP in the VSMCs. These results suggest that downregulation of YAP leads to apoptosis of VSMCs, which are essential for the homeostasis of the aortic wall. The resultant ECM disorders affect aortic structure and function and contribute to the development of ascending aortic aneurysms. In summary, through assessment of clinical samples, we revealed the association between downregulation of YAP in VSMCs and the development of ascending aortic aneurysms, providing new insight into the pathogenesis of this disease.<newchar><newabs>25916985<newchar>Eukaryotic high-mobility-group-box (HMGB) proteins are nuclear factors involved in chromatin remodeling and transcription regulation. When released into the extracellular milieu, HMGB1 acts as a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a central role in the pathogenesis of several immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. We found that the Plasmodium genome encodes two genuine HMGB factors, Plasmodium HMGB1 and HMGB2, that encompass, like their human counterparts, a proinflammatory domain. Given that these proteins are released from parasitized red blood cells, we then hypothesized that Plasmodium HMGB might contribute to the pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), a lethal neuroinflammatory syndrome that develops in C57BL/6 (susceptible) mice infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA and that in many aspects resembles human cerebral malaria elicited by P. falciparum infection. The pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria was suppressed in C57BL/6 mice infected with P. berghei ANKA lacking the hmgb2 gene (Δhmgb2 ANKA), an effect associated with a reduction of histological brain lesions and with lower expression levels of several proinflammatory genes. The incidence of ECM in pbhmgb2-deficient mice was restored by the administration of recombinant PbHMGB2. Protection from experimental cerebral malaria in Δhmgb2 ANKA-infected mice was associated with reduced sequestration in the brain of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells, including CD8(+) granzyme B(+) and CD8(+) IFN-γ(+) cells, and, to some extent, neutrophils. This was consistent with a reduced parasite sequestration in the brain, lungs, and spleen, though to a lesser extent than in wild-type P. berghei ANKA-infected mice. In summary, Plasmodium HMGB2 acts as an alarmin that contributes to the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.<newchar><newabs>25991604<newchar>MT1-MMP (MMP14) is a collagenolytic enzyme located at the cell surface and implicated in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Mmp14(-/-) mice present dwarfism, bone abnormalities, and premature death. We demonstrate herein that the loss of MT1-MMP also causes cardiac defects and severe metabolic changes, and alters the cytoskeleton and the nuclear lamina structure. Moreover, the absence of MT1-MMP induces a senescent phenotype characterized by up-regulation of p16(INK4a) and p21(CIP1/WAF) (1), increased activity of senescence-associated β-galactosidase, generation of a senescence-associated secretory phenotype, and somatotroph axis alterations. Consistent with the role of retinoic acid signaling in nuclear lamina stabilization, treatment of Mmp14(-/-) mice with all-trans retinoic acid reversed the nuclear lamina alterations, partially rescued the cell senescence phenotypes, ameliorated the pathological defects in bone, skin, and heart, and extended their life span. These results demonstrate that nuclear architecture and cell senescence can be modulated by a membrane protease, in a process involving the ECM as a key regulator of nuclear stiffness under cell stress conditions.<newchar>aging<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>metalloprotease<n-term>nuclear lamina<n-term>retinoids<n-term><newabs>25974241<newchar>Integrin-based (β3 ) attachments to the extracellular matrix (ECM) on osteocyte cell processes have recently been proposed to play an important role in facilitating osteocyte mechanosensation. However, it is not yet known whether integrin expression is altered in the mechanoregulatory osteocytes during osteoporosis. The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that the expression of integrin-based mechanosensory complexes (β1 and β3 integrins) is altered as a direct response to estrogen deficiency, in an estrogen deficient animal model of osteoporosis. Four weeks post-operatively, immunohistochemistry was used to detect for β1 and β3 integrin subunits in bone tissue and marrow of ovariectomized (OVX; N = 4) and SHAM (N = 4) operated animals. A tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) control stain was performed to quantify the presence of osteoclasts in the bone marrow and bone surfaces. Image analysis was performed to quantify expression patterns in different biological compartments, that is, bone marrow, endosteum, and cortical bone. Our results showed that β1 integrins were ubiquitously expressed throughout the bone and marrow, for both OVX and SHAM groups. β3 integrin subunit expression was lower in bone cells from osteoporotic animals compared to controls, whereas β3 expression in marrow cells did not differ significantly between groups. At the endosteum no difference was observed in β3 integrin subunit expression. As expected, the number of osteoclasts was higher in the OVX group validating an imbalance in bone remodeling. We propose that a reduction in β3 integrin expression in osteocytes might impair mechanosensation by bone cells during estrogen deficiency.<newchar>bone<n-term>immunohistochemistry<n-term>integrin<n-term>marrow<n-term>mechanosensors<n-term>osteoblast<n-term>osteocyte<n-term><newabs>23657851<newchar>A multidomain, multifunctional 230-kDa extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, hensin, regulates the adaptation of rabbit kidney to metabolic acidosis by remodeling collecting duct intercalated cells. Conditional deletion of hensin in intercalated cells of the mouse kidney leads to distal renal tubular acidosis and to a significant reduction in the number of cells expressing the basolateral chloride-bicarbonate exchanger kAE1, a characteristic marker of α-intercalated cells. Although hensin is secreted as a monomer, its polymerization and ECM assembly are essential for its role in the adaptation of the kidney to metabolic acidosis. Galectin-3, a unique lectin with specific affinity for β-galactoside glycoconjugates, directly interacts with hensin. Acidotic rabbits had a significant increase in the number of cells expressing galectin-3 in the collecting duct and exhibited colocalization of galectin-3 with hensin in the ECM of microdissected tubules. In this study, we confirmed the increased expression of galectin-3 in acidotic rabbit kidneys by real-time RT-PCR. Galectin-3 interacted with hensin in vitro via its carbohydrate-binding COOH-terminal domain, and the interaction was competitively inhibited by lactose, removal of the COOH-terminal domain of galectin-3, and deglycosylation of hensin. Galectin-9, a lectin with two carbohydrate-recognition domains, is also present in the rabbit kidney; galectin-9 partially oligomerized hensin in vitro. Our results demonstrate that galectin-3 plays a critical role in hensin ECM assembly by oligomerizing secreted monomeric hensin. Both the NH₂-terminal and COOH-terminal domains are required for this function. We suggest that in the case of galectin-3-null mice galectin-9 may partially substitute for the function of galectin-3.<newchar>clone C<n-term>collecting duct<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>intercalated cell<n-term>metabolic acidosis<n-term><newabs>25173957<newchar>Cell differentiation and response to hormonal signals were studied in a 3D environment on an in-house generated mouse fibroblast cell line expressing a reporter gene under the control of estrogen responsive sequences (EREs). 3D cell culture conditions were obtained in a Rotary Cell Culture System; (RCCS™), a microgravity based bioreactor that promotes the aggregation of cells into multicellular spheroids (MCS). In this bioreactor the cells maintained a better differentiated phenotype and more closely resembled in vivo tissue. The RCCS™ cultured fibroblasts showed higher expression of genes regulating cell assembly, differentiation and hormonal functions. Microarray analysis showed that genes related to cell cycle, proliferation, cytoskeleton, migration, adhesion and motility were all down-regulated in 3D as compared to 2D conditions, as well as oncogene expression and inflammatory cytokines. Controlled remodeling of ECM, which is an essential aspect of cell organization, homeostasis and tissue was affected by the culture method as assessed by immunolocalization of β-tubulin. Markers of cell organization, homeostasis and tissue repair, metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and its physiological inhibitor (TIMP4) changed expression in association with the relative formation of cell aggregates. The fibroblasts cultured in the RCCS™ maintain a better responsiveness to estrogens, measured as expression of ERα and regulation of an ERE-dependent reporter and of the endogenous target genes CBP, Rarb, MMP1 and Dbp. Our data highlight the interest of this 3D culture model for its potential application in the field of cell response to hormonal signals and the pharmaco-toxicological analyses of chemicals and natural molecules endowed of estrogenic potential.<newchar>3 dimension<n-term>Bioreactor<n-term>ECM<n-term>Estrogen receptor<n-term>Fibroblasts<n-term>Microgravity<n-term><newabs>12297105<newchar>The sea cucumber, Holothuria glaberrima, has the capacity to regenerate its internal organs. Intestinal regeneration is accomplished by the thickening of the mesenteric border and the invasion of this thickening by mucosal epithelium from the esophagus and the cloaca. Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling has been associated with morphogenetic events during embryonic development and regeneration. We have used immunohistochemical techniques against ECM components to show that differential changes occur in the ECM during early regeneration. Labeling of fibrous collagenous components and muscle-related laminin disappear from the regenerating intestine and mesentery, while fibronectin labeling and 4G7 (an echinoderm ECM component) are continuously present. Western blots confirm a decrease in fibrous collagen content during the first 2 weeks of regeneration. We have also identified five 1,10-phenanthroline-sensitive bands in collagen gelatin zymographs. The gelatinolytic activities of these bands are enhanced during early stages of regeneration, suggesting that the metalloprotease activity is associated with ECM remodeling. Inhibition of MMPs in vivo with 1,10-phenanthroline, p-aminobenzoyl-Gly-Pro-D-Leu-D-Ala hydroxamate or N-CBZ-Pro-Leu-Gly hydroxamate produces a reversible inhibition of intestinal regeneration and ECM remodeling. Our results show that significant changes in ECM content occur during intestine regeneration in the sea cucumber and that the onset of these changes is correlated to the proteolytic activities of MMPs.<newchar><newabs>24517112<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is a highly organized network of proteins and other macromolecules that plays a critical role in cell adhesion, migration, and differentiation. In this study, we hypothesize that ECM derived from in-vitro-cultured cells possesses unique surface texture, topography, and mechanical property, and consequently carries some distinct cues for vascular morphogenesis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (ECs). Cell-derived matrix (CDM) was obtained by culturing fibroblasts, preosteoblasts, and chondrocytes, respectively, on coverslips and then by decellularizing them using detergents and enzymes. These matrices were named fibroblast-derived matrix (FDM), preosteoblast-derived matrix (PDM), and chondrocyte-derived matrix (CHDM). Immunofluorescence of each CDM shows that some of the matrix components are fibronectin (FN), type I collagen, and laminin. Atomic force microscopy analysis presented that average fiber diameter ranged from 2 to 7 μm and FDM holds much larger fibers. The matrix elasticity measurements revealed that average Young's modulus of CHDM (17.7 ± 4.2 kPa) was much greater than that of PDM (10.5 ± 1.1 kPa) or FDM (5.7 ± 0.5 kPa). During 5-day culture, EC morphologies were dramatically changed on PDM and FDM, but those on CHDM and gelatin were rather stable, regardless of time lapse. Cell migration assay discovered quicker repopulation of the scratched areas on PDM and FDM than on gelatin and CHDM. A capillary-like structure (CLS) assembly was also notable only in the PDM and FDM, as compared with CHDM, gelatin, or FN that were very poor in CLS formation. Quantitative analysis of mean CLS branch points and branch lengths demonstrated much better angiogenic activity of ECs on PDM and FDM. Interestingly, CLS formation was closely associated with matrix remodeling by ECs and the matrix clearance on PDM with time was sharply contrasted with that on CHDM that majority of the matrix FN was reserved. It was notable that membrane type 1-matrix metalloprotease was deeply involved in the process of matrix remodeling. This study indicates that specific matrix microenvironments are very critical for vascular morphogenesis of ECs, and thus, provide a nice platform for angiogenesis study as well as vascular tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>25700776<newchar>Cancerous tissue is a complex mix of tumor cells, stromal cells and extracellular matrix (ECM), all of which make up a disordered and aggressive niche in comparison with organized and homeostatic normal tissue. It is well accepted that the tumor microenvironment plays an indispensable role in cancer development, and thus can be recognized as an additional cancer hallmark alongside those that are well established. In breast cancer, cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are the predominant cellular components and play a centric role in the tumor microenvironment since they not only promote cancer initiation, growth, invasion, metastasis and therapeutic resistance but are also involved in microenvironmental events including angiogenesis/lymphangiogenesis, ECM remodeling, cancer-associated inflammation and metabolism reprogramming, all of which are known to have pre-malignancy potency. At the molecular level, there is a sophisticated network underlying the interactions between CAFs and epithelial cells as well as other stromal components. Accordingly, targeting CAFs provides a novel strategy in cancer therapy. Herein, we summarize the current understanding of the role of CAFs in breast cancer.<newchar>Breast carcinoma<n-term>Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)<n-term>Progression<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>25636594<newchar>Recently, decellularized tissues for organ transplantation and regeneration have been actively studied in the field of tissue engineering. In the decellularization process, surfactants such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) have been most commonly used to remove cellular components from the tissue. However, the residual surfactant may be cytotoxic in vivo and has been reported to hinder remodeling after implantation. In addition, treatment with surfactants may destroy the important extracellular matrix (ECM) structure that allows the decellularized tissue to function as a scaffold for cells. In this study, decellularized tissues with high biocompatibility were created using the recipient's serum. By immersing a heterogeneous tissue in serum conditioned to activate the complement system and DNase I, its cellular components could be removed. Compared to an SDS-treated graft, the serum-treated graft preserved the native structure of its ECM. When subcutaneously implanted into an isogenic inbred rat, the graft treated with the recipient's serum resulted in less immunorejection than did the SDS-treated graft.<newchar><newabs>23571003<newchar>During angiogenesis, endothelial cells (ECs) use both soluble and insoluble cues to expand the existing vascular network to meet the changing trophic needs of the tissue. Fundamental to this expansion are physical interactions between ECs and extracellular matrix (ECM) that influence sprout migration, lumen formation and stabilization. These physical interactions suggest that ECM mechanical properties may influence sprouting ECs and, therefore, angiogenic responses. In a three-dimensional angiogenic model in which a monolayer of ECs is induced to invade an underlying collagen matrix, angiogenic responses were measured as a function of collagen matrix stiffness by inducing collagen crosslinking with microbial transglutaminase (mTG). By biaxial mechanical testing, stiffer collagen matrices were measured with both mTG treatment and incubation time. Using two-photon excited fluorescence (TPF) and second harmonic generation (SHG), it was shown that collagen TPF intensity increased with mTG treatment, and the TPF/SHG ratio correlated with biaxially tested mechanical stiffness. SHG and OCM were further used to show that other ECM physical properties such as porosity and pore size did not change with mTG treatment, thus verifying that matrix stiffness was tuned independently of matrix density. The results showed that stiffer matrices promote more angiogenic sprouts that invade deeper. No differences in lumen size were observed between control and mTG stiffened matrices, but greater remodeling was revealed in stiffer gels using SHG and OCM. The results of this study show that angiogenic responses are influenced by stiffness and suggest that ECM properties may be useful in regenerative medicine applications to engineer angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>19577572<newchar>The cardiac interstitium is a unique and adaptable extracellular matrix (ECM) that provides a milieu in which myocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells communicate and function. The composition of the ECM in the heart includes structural proteins such as fibrillar collagens and matricellular proteins that modulate cell:ECM interaction. Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC), a collagen-binding matricellular protein, serves a key role in collagen assembly into the ECM. Recent results demonstrated increased cardiac rupture, dysfunction and mortality in SPARC-null mice in response to myocardial infarction that was associated with a decreased capacity to generate organized, mature collagen fibers. In response to pressure overload induced-hypertrophy, the decrease in insoluble collagen incorporation in the left ventricle of SPARC-null hearts was coincident with diminished ventricular stiffness in comparison to WT mice with pressure overload. This review will focus on the role of SPARC in the regulation of interstitial collagen during cardiac remodeling following myocardial infarction and pressure overload with a discussion of potential cellular mechanisms that control SPARC-dependent collagen assembly in the heart.<newchar><newabs>26605302<newchar>Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine-based strategies for the reconstruction of functional skeletal muscle tissue have included cellular and acellular approaches. The use of acellular biologic scaffold material as a treatment for volumetric muscle loss (VML) in five patients has recently been reported with a generally favorable outcome. Further studies are necessary for a better understanding of the mechanism(s) behind acellular bioscaffold-mediated skeletal muscle repair, and for combination cell-based/bioscaffold based approaches. The present overview highlights the current thinking on bioscaffold-based remodeling including the associated mechanisms and the future of scaffold-based skeletal muscle reconstruction.<newchar>Tissue engineering<n-term>bioscaffolds<n-term>extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>regenerative medicine<n-term>skeletal muscle reconstruction<n-term>volumetric muscle loss (VML)<n-term><newabs>20107040<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling occurs during normal homeostasis and also plays an important role during development, tissue repair, and in various disease processes. ECM remodeling involves changes in the synthesis, deposition, and degradation of ECM molecules. ECM molecules can be degraded extracellularly, as well as intracellularly following endocytosis. Our data show that the ECM protein fibronectin is an important regulator of ECM remodeling. We previously showed that agents that inhibit the polymerization of fibronectin into ECM fibrils promote the loss of preexisting fibronectin matrix and accelerate fibronectin endocytosis and degradation. In this paper we show that inhibition of fibronectin polymerization leads to the loss of collagen I matrix fibrils and a corresponding increase in the levels of endocytosed collagen I. In contrast, manipulations that stabilize fibronectin matrix fibrils, such as caveolin-1 depletion, stabilize collagen I matrix fibrils and cause a decrease in ECM collagen I endocytosis. Our data also show that endocytosis of ECM collagen I is regulated by both beta1 integrins and Endo180/urokinase plasminogen activator associated protein (uPARAP). Unexpectedly, Endo180/uPARAP was also shown to promote the endocytosis of fibronectin from the ECM. These data demonstrate that fibronectin polymerization regulates the remodeling of ECM collagen I, in part, by regulating collagen I endocytosis. Furthermore, these data show that processes that regulate ECM deposition coordinately regulate the removal of proteins from the ECM. These data highlight the complexity of ECM remodeling. This multifaceted regulatory process may be important to ensure tight regulation of ECM fibronectin and collagen I levels.<newchar><newabs>26086079<newchar>Branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) is a common retinal vascular disease, but global protein changes following the condition remain largely unelucidated. To bring new insights into pathological processes and identify potential therapeutic targets, large-scale retinal protein changes following BRVO were studied by combining a porcine model of experimental BRVO with proteomic analysis by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Among a total set of 1974 proteins, 52 significantly upregulated proteins and 10 significantly downregulated proteins were identified in retinas with BRVO after 15 days. Significantly upregulated proteins were involved in signaling pathways of focal adhesion via integrin and blood coagulation. Proteins involved in focal adhesion signaling included collagen α-2 chain, laminin subunit β-2, laminin subunit γ-1, lipocalin-7, nidogen-2, osteopontin, integrin-β, α-actinin-1, isoform 2 of α-actinin-1, talin-2 and filamin C. The identified proteins indicate that BRVO was associated with extracellular matrix remodeling processes. The present study identified focal adhesion signaling and ECM remodeling as important biological mechanisms to evaluate in the search for signaling pathways that promote neovascularisation and macular edema following BRVO.<newchar>Adhesion<n-term>Biological marker<n-term>Branch retinal vein occlusion<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Lipocalin<n-term>Mass spectrometry<n-term>Myosin 9<n-term>Osteopontin<n-term>Proteomics<n-term>Retina<n-term><newabs>21908588<newchar>Chronic inflammatory airway diseases like asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are characterized by airway remodeling with altered extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. Transforming growth factor-β(1) (TGF-β(1)) is upregulated in asthma and COPD and contributes to tissue remodeling in the airways by driving ECM production by structural cells, including airway smooth muscle. In this study, we investigated the activation of β-catenin signaling and its contribution to ECM production by airway smooth muscle cells in response to TGF-β(1). Stimulation of airway smooth muscle cells with TGF-β(1) resulted in a time-dependent increase of total and nonphosphorylated β-catenin protein expression via induction of β-catenin mRNA and inhibition of GSK-3. In addition, the TGF-β(1)-induced β-catenin activated TCF/LEF-dependent gene transcription, as determined by the β-catenin sensitive TOP-flash luciferase reporter assay. Furthermore, TGF-β(1) stimulation increased mRNA expression of collagen Iα1, fibronectin, versican, and PAI-1. Pharmacological inhibition of β-catenin by PKF115-584 or downregulation of β-catenin expression by specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) substantially inhibited TGF-β(1)-induced expression of the ECM genes. Fibronectin protein deposition by airway smooth muscle cells in response to TGF-β(1) was also inhibited by PKF115-584 and β-catenin siRNA. Moreover, transfection of airway smooth muscle cells with a nondegradable β-catenin mutant (S33Y β-catenin) was sufficient for inducing fibronectin protein expression. Collectively, these findings indicate that β-catenin signaling is activated in response to TGF-β(1) in airway smooth muscle cells, which is required and sufficient for the regulation of ECM protein production. Targeting β-catenin-dependent gene transcription may therefore hold promise as a therapeutic intervention in airway remodeling in both asthma and COPD.<newchar><newabs>20627079<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is critical for organogenesis, yet its molecular regulation is poorly understood. In zebrafish, asymmetric migration of the epithelial lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) displaces the gut leftward, allowing correct placement of the liver and pancreas. To observe LPM migration at cellular resolution, we transgenically expressed EGFP under the control of the regulatory sequences of the bHLH transcription factor gene hand2. We found that laminin is distributed along the LPM/gut boundary during gut looping, and that it appears to become diminished by the migrating hand2-expressing cells. Laminin diminishment is necessary for LPM migration and is dependent on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. Loss of Hand2 function causes reduced MMP activity and prolonged laminin deposition at the LPM/gut boundary, leading to failed asymmetric LPM migration and gut looping. Our study reveals an unexpected role for Hand2, a key regulator of cell specification and differentiation, in modulating ECM remodeling during organogenesis.<newchar><newabs>26025666<newchar>Targeting the tumor microenvironment is critical toward improving the effectiveness of cancer therapeutics. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are one of the most abundant cell types of the tumor microenvironment, playing an important role in tumor progression. Multiple origins for CAFs have been proposed including resident fibroblasts, adipocytes, and bone marrow. Our laboratory previously identified a novel hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) origin for CAFs; however, the functional roles of HSC-derived CAFs (HSC-CAFs) in tumor progression have not yet been examined. To test the hypothesis that HSC-CAFs promote tumor progression through contribution to extracellular matrix (ECM) and paracrine production of pro-angiogenic factors, we developed a method to isolate HSC-CAFs. HSC-CAFs were profiled on the basis of their expression of hematopoietic and fibroblastic markers in two murine tumor models. Profiling revealed production of factors associated with ECM deposition and remodeling. Functional in vivo studies showed that co-injection of HSC-CAFs with tumor cells resulted in increased tumor growth rate and significantly larger tumors than tumor cells alone. Immunohistochemical studies revealed increased blood vessel density with co-injection, demonstrating a role for HSC-CAFs in tumor vascularization. Mechanistic in vitro studies indicated that HSC-CAFs play a role in producing vascular endothelial growth factor A and transforming growth factor-β1 in endothelial tube formation and patterning. In vitro and in vivo findings suggest that HSC-CAFs are a critical component of the tumor microenvironment and suggest that targeting the novel HSC-CAF may be a promising therapeutic strategy.<newchar><newabs>25194127<newchar>We evaluated the effects of N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methylester (L-NAME) (50 mg/kg/day) and 7-nitroindazole (7NI) (10 mg/kg/day) administered from 10th-16th week of age either individually or together on cardiovascular system of Wistar rats and SHR. Systolic blood pressure (sBP) was measured weekly by the plethysmographic method. For morphological studies, the animals (n=10) were perfused with a fixative (120 mm Hg), and thoracic aorta and carotid and coronary arteries were processed for electron microscopy. For functional investigation (n=10), aortic rings were used in an organ bath. In Wistar rats, L-NAME evoked an increase of sBP; hypertrophy of the heart and arterial walls; an increase in cross-sectional areas (CSA) of endothelial cells (EC), muscle cells (SMC), extracellular matrix (ECM), and a decrease in acetylcholine-induced endothelial-dependent relaxation (EDR). 7NI evoked sBP-independent hypotrophy of the heart and arterial walls, a decrease in CSA of EC and SMC without affecting the CSA of ECM, and a mild decrease in acetylcholine-induced EDR. 7NI and L-NAME administered together evoked lower effect on BP and trophicity of the heart and all arteries, and a similar decrease in acetylcholine-induced EDR compared to L-NAME alone. In SHR, 7NI did not evoke any effect on the studied parameters.<newchar><newabs>24038389<newchar>In diseases such as cancer, cells need to degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM) and therefore require high protease levels. Thus, aberrant tissue degradation is associated to matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) overexpression resulting from different mechanisms including epigenetic events. One of the most characterized epigenetic mechanisms is DNA methylation causing changes in chromatin conformation, thereby decreasing the accessibility to the transcriptional machinery and resulting in a robust gene silencing. Modulation of DNA methylation by DNA hypomethylating agents such as 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azadC) is widely used in epigenetic anticancer treatments. Here, we focus on the effects of this drug on the expression level of MMP-1, -2, and -9 in human HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells. We demonstrate that 5-azadC increases MMP expression at both mRNA and protein levels, and promotes invasion potential of HT1080 cells. Using broad-spectrum and specific MMP inhibitors, we establish that MMP-1, but not MMP-2 and -9, plays a key role in 5-azadC-enhanced cell invasion. We show that 5-azadC induces MMP-1 expression through a transcriptional mechanism without affecting MMP-1 promoter methylation status. Finally, we demonstrate that 5-azadC treatment increases the nuclear levels of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors, and modulates their recruitment to the MMP-1 promoter, resulting in chromatin remodeling associated to 5-azadC-induced MMP-1 expression. All together, our data indicate that the hypomethylating agent 5-azadC modulates, mainly via Sp1 recruitment, MMP-1 expression resulting in an increased invasive potential of HT1080 cells.<newchar>cancer<n-term>chromatin remodeling<n-term>epigenetics<n-term><newabs>25134793<newchar>Patients with idiopathic fibrosis (IPF) have poor long-term survival as there are limited diagnostic/prognostic tools or successful therapies. Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) has been implicated in IPF progression; however, the structural consequences on the collagen architecture have not received considerable attention. Here, we demonstrate that second harmonic generation (SHG) and multiphoton fluorescence microscopy can quantitatively differentiate normal and IPF human tissues. For SHG analysis, we developed a classifier based on wavelet transforms, principle component analysis, and a K-nearest-neighbor algorithm to classify the specific alterations of the collagen structure observed in IPF tissues. The resulting ROC curves obtained by varying the numbers of principal components and nearest neighbors yielded accuracies of &gt;95%. In contrast, simpler metrics based on SHG intensity and collagen coverage in the image provided little or no discrimination. We also characterized the change in the elastin/collagen balance by simultaneously measuring the elastin autofluorescence and SHG intensities and found that the IPF tissues were less elastic relative to collagen. This is consistent with known mechanical consequences of the disease. Understanding ECM remodeling in IPF via nonlinear optical microscopy may enhance our ability to differentiate patients with rapid and slow progression and, thus, provide better prognostic information.<newchar><newabs>26025392<newchar>The ADAMTS (A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin motifs) enzymes are secreted, multi-domain matrix-associated zinc metalloendopeptidases that have diverse roles in tissue morphogenesis and patho-physiological remodeling, in inflammation and in vascular biology. The human family includes 19 members that can be sub-grouped on the basis of their known substrates, namely the aggrecanases or proteoglycanases (ADAMTS1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 15 and 20), the procollagen N-propeptidases (ADAMTS2, 3 and 14), the cartilage oligomeric matrix protein-cleaving enzymes (ADAMTS7 and 12), the von-Willebrand Factor proteinase (ADAMTS13) and a group of orphan enzymes (ADAMTS6, 10, 16, 17, 18 and 19). Control of the structure and function of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a central theme of the biology of the ADAMTS, as exemplified by the actions of the procollagen-N-propeptidases in collagen fibril assembly and of the aggrecanases in the cleavage or modification of ECM proteoglycans. Defects in certain family members give rise to inherited genetic disorders, while the aberrant expression or function of others is associated with arthritis, cancer and cardiovascular disease. In particular, ADAMTS4 and 5 have emerged as therapeutic targets in arthritis. Multiple ADAMTSs from different sub-groupings exert either positive or negative effects on tumorigenesis and metastasis, with both metalloproteinase-dependent and -independent actions known to occur. The basic ADAMTS structure comprises a metalloproteinase catalytic domain and a carboxy-terminal ancillary domain, the latter determining substrate specificity and the localization of the protease and its interaction partners; ancillary domains probably also have independent biological functions. Focusing primarily on the aggrecanases and proteoglycanases, this review provides a perspective on the evolution of the ADAMTS family, their links with developmental and disease mechanisms, and key questions for the future.<newchar><newabs>25331589<newchar>The most common feature of endothelial dysfunction is endothelial inflammation. A bunch of factors are associated with endothelial dysfunction. These include pro-inflammatory cytokines, cell adhesion molecules, and matrix degrading enzymes. SIRT4, a member of the sirtuin family, is a mitochondrial ADP-ribosyltransferase. The roles of SIRT4 in regulating inflammation in endothelial cells are unknown. In this study, we found that lipopolysaccharide treatment decreased the expression of SIRT4 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Silence of SIRT4 exacerbated the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8), COX-prostaglandin system (COX-2), ECM remodeling enzymes MMP-9, and the adhesion molecule ICAM-1. The upregulation of these genes are involved in inflammation, vascular remodeling, and angiogenesis. In contrast, overexpression of SIRT4 attenuated the induction of these factors. Mechanistically, SIRT4 was found to interfere with the NF-κB signaling pathway by preventing NF-κB nuclear translocation and thereby has an anti-inflammatory function. Loss of SIRT4 increased the nuclear translocation as well as the transcriptional activity of NF-κB. However, overexpression of SIRT4 mitigated the nuclear translocation and the transcriptional activity of NF-κB. Our data suggested that SIRT4 might be a potential pharmacological target for inflammatory vascular diseases.<newchar><newabs>22380695<newchar>Cardiac remodelling is defined as changes in the size, shape, and function of the heart, which are most commonly caused by hypertension-induced left ventricular hypertrophy and myocardial infarction. Both neurohumoral and inflammatory factors have critical roles in the regulation of cardiac remodelling. A characteristic feature of cardiac remodelling is modification of the extracellular matrix (ECM), often manifested by fibrosis, a process that has vital consequences for the structure and function of the myocardium. In addition to established modulators of the ECM, the matricellular protein thrombospondin-4 (TSP-4) as well as the tumour necrosis factor-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) and its receptor Fn14 has been recently shown to modulate cardiac ECM. TSP-4 null mice develop pronounced cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis with defects in collagen maturation in response to pressure overload. TWEAK and Fn14 belong to the tumour necrosis factor superfamily of proinflammatory cytokines. Recently it was shown that elevated levels of circulating TWEAK via Fn14 critically affect the cardiac ECM, characterized by increasing fibrosis and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in mice. Here we review the literature concerning the role of matricellular proteins and inflammation in cardiac ECM remodelling, with a special focus on TSP-4, TWEAK, and its receptor Fn14.<newchar><newabs>26092987<newchar>Cardiac myofibroblast differentiation, as one of the most important cellular responses to heart injury, plays a critical role in cardiac remodeling and failure. While biochemical cues for this have been extensively investigated, the role of mechanical cues, e.g., extracellular matrix stiffness and mechanical strain, has also been found to mediate cardiac myofibroblast differentiation. Cardiac fibroblasts in vivo are typically subjected to a specific spatiotemporally changed mechanical microenvironment. When exposed to abnormal mechanical conditions (e.g., increased extracellular matrix stiffness or strain), cardiac fibroblasts can undergo myofibroblast differentiation. To date, the impact of mechanical cues on cardiac myofibroblast differentiation has been studied both in vitro and in vivo. Most of the related in vitro research into this has been mainly undertaken in two-dimensional cell culture systems, although a few three-dimensional studies that exist revealed an important role of dimensionality. However, despite remarkable advances, the comprehensive mechanisms for mechanoregulation of cardiac myofibroblast differentiation remain elusive. In this review, we introduce important parameters for evaluating cardiac myofibroblast differentiation and then discuss the development of both in vitro (two and three dimensional) and in vivo studies on mechanoregulation of cardiac myofibroblast differentiation. An understanding of the development of cardiac myofibroblast differentiation in response to changing mechanical microenvironment will underlie potential targets for future therapy of cardiac fibrosis and failure.<newchar>ECM stiffness<n-term>cardiac myofibroblast differentiation<n-term>mechanical cues<n-term>mechanical microenvironment<n-term>mechanical strain<n-term><newabs>26918156<newchar>Much progress in understanding cell migration has been determined by using classic two-dimensional (2D) tissue culture platforms. However, increasingly, it is appreciated that certain properties of cell migration in vivo are not represented by strictly 2D assays. There is much interest in creating relevant three-dimensional (3D) culture environments and engineered platforms to better represent features of the extracellular matrix and stromal microenvironment that are not captured in 2D platforms. Important to this goal is a solid understanding of the features of the extracellular matrix-composition, stiffness, topography, and alignment-in different tissues and disease states and the development of means to capture these features.<newchar>ECM<n-term>Matrix remodeling<n-term>cell migration<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>stromal microenvironment<n-term><newabs>23668543<newchar>Oncostatin M (OSM), an inflammatory cytokine of the interleukin-6 (IL-6) superfamily, plays a key role in various biological processes such as modulation of extracellular matrix (ECM), cell proliferation, cell survival, and induction of inflammation. It has been reported that OSM was increased in asthma and pulmonary fibrosis, and thus OSM may play a role in airway remodeling and the development of lung parenchymal fibrosis. Recruitment of lung fibroblasts to the sites of airway injury and subsequent differentiation into myofibroblasts is believed to contribute to excess ECM deposition. In the current study, we assessed the ability of OSM to modulate fibroblast collagen gel contraction, migration toward fibronectin, and expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA). We demonstrated that OSM augments gel contraction, chemotaxis, and α-SMA expression. OSM-augmented fibroblast chemotaxis was mediated by the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT3) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, while augmentation on gel contraction and α-SMA expression was mediated by STAT3. Neither transforming growth factor-β1 nor PGE2 was involved in mediating OSM effect on the cells. The Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13, which also are believed to play an important role in promoting lung fibrosis and airway remodeling, act through STAT3, and we demonstrated the potential for additive effects of OSM with IL-4 and IL-13. The present study supports the concept that OSM may contribute to tissue remodeling, which may be additive with IL-4 or IL-13. Blockade of OSM or OSM-mediated STAT3 signaling could be a therapeutic target to regulate lung fibrotic mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>25916957<newchar>The objective of the study was to identify the deregulated miRNA in autonomous adenoma and to correlate the data with mRNA regulation. Seven autonomous adenoma with adjacent healthy thyroid tissues were investigated. Twelve miRNAs were downregulated and one was upregulated in the tumors. Combining bioinformatic mRNA target prediction and microarray data on mRNA regulations allowed to identify mRNA targets of our deregulated miRNAs. A large enrichment in mRNA encoding proteins involved in extracellular matrix organization and different phosphodiesterases were identified among these putative targets. The direct interaction between miR-101-3p and miR-144-3p and PDE4D mRNA was experimentally validated. The global miRNA profiles were not greatly modified, confirming the definition of these tumors as minimal deviation tumors. These results support a role for miRNA in the regulation of extracellular matrix proteins and tissue remodeling occurring during tumor development, and in the important negative feedback of the cAMP pathway, which limits the consequences of its constitutive activation in these tumors.<newchar>Autonomous adenoma<n-term>ECM<n-term>cAMP<n-term>miRNA<n-term><newabs>23504182<newchar>Pulmonary insufficiency (PI) is a common long-term sequel after repair of tetralogy of Fallot, causing progressive right ventricular (RV) dilation and failure. We describe the physiologic and molecular characteristics of the first murine model of RV volume overload. PI was created by entrapping the pulmonary valve leaflets with sutures. Imaging, catheterization, and exercise testing were performed at 1, 3, and 6 mo and compared with sham controls. RNA from the RV free wall was hybridized to Agilent whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays. Volume overload resulted in RV enlargement, decreased RV outflow tract shortening fraction at 1 mo followed by normalization at 3 and 6 mo (39 ± 2, 44 ± 2, and 41 ± 2 vs. 46 ± 3% in sham), early reversal of early and late diastolic filling velocities (E/A ratio) followed by pseudonormalization (0.87 ± 0.08, 0.82 ± 0.08, and 0.96 ± 0.08 vs. 1.04 ± 0.03; P &lt; 0.05), elevated end-diastolic pressure (7.6 ± 0.7, 6.9 ± 0.8, and 7 ± 0.5 vs. 2.7 ± 0.2 mmHg; P &lt; 0.05), and decreased exercise duration (26 ± 0.4, 26 ± 1, and 22 ± 1.3 vs. 30 ± 1.1 min; P &lt; 0.05). Subendocardial RV fibrosis was evident by 1 mo. At 1 mo, 372 genes were significantly downregulated. Mitochondrial pathways and G protein-coupled receptor signaling were the most represented categories. At 3 mo, 434 genes were upregulated and 307 downregulated. While many of the same pathways continued to be downregulated, TNF-α, transforming growth factor-β(1) (TGF-β(1)), p53-signaling, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling transitioned from down- to upregulated. We describe a novel murine model of chronic RV volume overload recapitulating aspects of the clinical disease with gene expression changes suggesting early mitochondrial bioenergetic dysfunction, enhanced TGF-β signaling, ECM remodeling, and apoptosis.<newchar>congenital<n-term>heart failure<n-term>remodeling<n-term>right ventricle<n-term>ventricles<n-term><newabs>25724668<newchar>Multiple pulmonary conditions are characterized by an abnormal misbalance between various tissue components, for example, an increase in the fibrous connective tissue and loss/increase in extracellular matrix proteins (ECM). Such tissue remodeling may adversely impact physiological function of airway smooth muscle cells (ASMCs) responsible for contraction of airways and release of a variety of bioactive molecules. However, few efforts have been made to understand the potentially significant impact of tissue remodeling on ASMCs. Therefore, this study reports how ASMCs respond to a change in mechanical stiffness of a matrix, to which ASMCs adhere because mechanical stiffness of the remodeled airways is often different from the physiological stiffness. Accordingly, using atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements, we found that the elastic modulus of the mouse bronchus has an arithmetic mean of 23.1 ± 14 kPa (SD) (median 18.6 kPa). By culturing ASMCs on collagen-conjugated polyacrylamide hydrogels with controlled elastic moduli, we found that gels designed to be softer than average airway tissue significantly increased cellular secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Conversely, gels stiffer than average airways stimulated cell proliferation, while reducing VEGF secretion and agonist-induced calcium responses of ASMCs. These dependencies of cellular activities on elastic modulus of the gel were correlated with changes in the expression of integrin-β1 and integrin-linked kinase (ILK). Overall, the results of this study demonstrate that changes in matrix mechanics alter cell proliferation, calcium signaling, and proangiogenic functions in ASMCs.<newchar>airways smooth muscle cells<n-term>asthma<n-term>hydrogel<n-term>integrin<n-term>matrix stiffness<n-term><newabs>25959210<newchar>Bleomycin (BLM) is a drug used to treat different types of neoplasms. BLM's most severe adverse effect is lung toxicity, which induces remodeling of lung architecture and loss of pulmonary function, rapidly leading to death. While its clinical role as an anticancer agent is limited, its use in experimental settings is widespread since BLM is one of the most widely used drugs for inducing lung fibrosis in animals, due to its ability to provoke a histologic lung pattern similar to that described in patients undergoing chemotherapy. This pattern is characterized by patchy parenchymal inflammation, epithelial cell injury with reactive hyperplasia, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, activation and differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts, basement membrane and alveolar epithelium injuries. Several studies have demonstrated that BLM damage is mediated by DNA strand scission producing single- or double-strand breaks that lead to increased production of free radicals. Up to now, the mechanisms involved in the development of pulmonary fibrosis have not been fully understood; several studies have analyzed various potential biological molecular factors, such as transforming growth factor beta 1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, components of the extracellular matrix, chaperones, interleukins and chemokines. The aim of this paper is to review the specific characteristics of BLM-induced lung fibrosis in different animal models and to summarize modalities and timing of in vivo drug administration. Understanding the mechanisms of BLM-induced lung fibrosis and of commonly used therapies for counteracting fibrosis provides an opportunity for translating potential molecular targets from animal models to the clinical arena.<newchar>Animal models<n-term>Bleomycin (BLM)<n-term>Extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)<n-term>Pulmonary fibrosis<n-term>Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β)<n-term><newabs>27237320<newchar>The sequence of genomic alterations acquired by cancer cells during tumor progression and metastasis is poorly understood. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that integrates cytoskeleton remodeling, mitogenic signaling and cell survival. FAK has previously been reported to undergo nuclear localization during cell migration, cell differentiation and apoptosis. However, the mechanism behind FAK nuclear accumulation and its contribution to tumor progression has remained elusive. We report that amplification of FAK and the SUMO E3 ligase PIAS1 gene loci frequently co-occur in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and that both gene products are enriched in a subset of primary NSCLCs. We demonstrate that endogenous FAK and PIAS1 proteins interact in the cytoplasm and the cell nucleus of NSCLC cells. Ectopic expression of PIAS1 promotes proteolytic cleavage of the FAK C-terminus, focal adhesion maturation and FAK nuclear localization. Silencing of PIAS1 deregulates focal adhesion turnover, increases susceptibility to apoptosis in vitro and impairs tumor xenograft formation in vivo. Nuclear FAK in turn stimulates gene transcription favoring DNA repair, cell metabolism and cytoskeleton regulation. Consistently, ablation of FAK by CRISPR/Cas9 editing, results in basal DNA damage, susceptibility to ionizing radiation and impaired oxidative phosphorylation. Our findings provide insight into a mechanism regulating FAK cytoplasm-nuclear distribution and demonstrate that FAK activity in the nucleus promotes NSCLC survival and progression by increasing cell-ECM interaction and DNA repair regulation.<newchar><newabs>25107915<newchar>During tumor development, tumor cells constantly communicate with the surrounding microenvironment through both biochemical and biophysical cues. In particular, the tumor microenvironment can instruct carcinoma cells to undergo a morphogenesis program termed epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to facilitate local invasion and metastatic dissemination. Growing evidence uncovered a plethora of microenvironmental factors in promoting EMT, including proinflammatory cytokines secreted by locally activated stromal cells, hypoxia conditions, extracellular matrix components, and mechanical properties. Here, we review various biochemical and biophysical factors in the tumor microenvironment that directly impinge upon the EMT program. Specifically, cytokines such as TGFβ, TNFα, and IL6 and hypoxia are capable of inducing EMT in various tumors. Several extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, including collagen-I, fibronectin, and hyaluronan, and ECM remodeling via extracellular lysyl oxidase are also implicated in regulating EMT. In preclinical studies and ongoing clinical trials, targeting these tumor microenvironmental signals has shown promises in halting tumor progression in various human cancers.<newchar><newabs>26899203<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides structural support, cell migration anchorage, cell differentiation cues, and fine-tuned cell proliferation signals during all stages of bone fracture healing, including cartilaginous callus formation, callus remodeling, and bony bridging of the fracture gap. In the present study we have defined the role of the extracellular matrix protein ameloblastin (AMBN) in fracture resistance and fracture healing of mouse long bones. To this end, long bones from WT and AMBN(Δ5-6) truncation model mice were subjected to biomechanical analysis, fracture healing assays, and stem cell colony formation comparisons. The effect of exogenous AMBN addition to fracture sites was also determined. Our data indicate that lack of a functional AMBN in the bone matrix resulted in 31% decreased femur bone mass and 40% reduced energy to failure. On a cellular level, AMBN function inhibition diminished the proliferative capacity of fracture repair callus cells, as evidenced by a 58% reduction in PCNA and a 40% reduction in Cyclin D1 gene expression, as well as PCNA immunohistochemistry. In terms of fracture healing, AMBN truncation was associated with an enhanced and prolonged chondrogenic phase, resulting in delayed mineralized tissue gene expression and delayed ossification of the fracture repair callus. Underscoring a role of AMBN in fracture healing, there was a 6.9-fold increase in AMBN expression at the fracture site one week after fracture, and distinct AMBN immunolabeling in the fracture gap. Finally, application of exogenous AMBN protein to bone fracture sites accelerated callus formation and bone fracture healing (33% increase in bone volume and 19% increase in bone mineral density), validating the findings of our AMBN loss of function studies. Together, these data demonstrate the functional importance of the AMBN extracellular matrix protein in bone fracture prevention and rapid fracture healing.<newchar>Ameloblastin<n-term>Bone fracture<n-term>Fracture healing<n-term>Mesenchymal stem cells<n-term>Proliferation<n-term><newabs>22065384<newchar>Of the many processes that affect the outcome of wound repair, epidermal-dermal interactions are essential to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and in particular, soluble factors released by keratinocytes are known to have a direct impact on the production of ECM by dermal fibroblasts. Aminopeptidase N (APN) has recently been proposed as a cell-surface receptor for stratifin and is responsible for the stratifin-mediated matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) upregulation in fibroblasts. The present study examines whether modulation of APN gene expression has any impact on the fibroblast ECM gene expression profile. The result reveals that in the presence of keratinocyte-derived soluble factors, transient knockdown of APN in dermal fibroblasts affects the expression of key ECM components such as fibronectin, tenascin-C, MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-12. The regulatory effects of APN on fibronectin and selective MMPs appear to be associated with receptor-mediated signal transduction independently of its peptidase activity. On the contrary, inhibition of the APN enzymatic activity by bestatin significantly reduces the tenascin-C expression and enhances the contraction of fibroblast-populated collagen gel, suggesting an activity-dependent regulation of fibroblast contractility by APN. The overall effects of APN on the expression of fibronectin, tenascin-C, and MMPs in fibroblasts propose an important role for APN in the regulation of keratinocyte-mediated ECM remodeling and fibroblast contractile activity.<newchar><newabs>16919434<newchar>Via integrins, cells can sense dimensionality and other physical and biochemical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Cells respond differently to two-dimensional substrates and three-dimensional environments, activating distinct signaling pathways for each. Direct integrin signaling and indirect integrin modulation of growth factor and other intracellular signaling pathways regulate ECM remodeling and control subsequent cell behavior and tissue organization. ECM remodeling is critical for many developmental processes, and remodeled ECM contributes to tumorigenesis. These recent advances in the field provide new insights and raise new questions about the mechanisms of ECM synthesis and proteolytic degradation, as well as the roles of integrins and tension in ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23899461<newchar>Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause of mortality in Western populations. Growing evidence from human and rodent studies indicate that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause regression of existing colon tumors and act as effective chemopreventive agents in sporadic colon tumor formation. Although much is known about the action of the NSAID sulindac, especially its role in inducing apoptosis, mechanisms underlying these effects is poorly understood. In previous secretome-based proteomic studies using 2D-DIGE/MS and cytokine arrays we identified over 150 proteins released from the CRC cell line LIM1215 whose expression levels were dysregulated by treatment with 1mM sulindac over 16h; many of these proteins are implicated in molecular and cellular functions such as cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, angiogenesis and apoptosis (Ji et al., Proteomics Clin. Appl. 2009, 3, 433-451). We have extended these studies and describe here an improved protein/peptide separation strategy that facilitated the identification of 987 proteins and peptides released from LIM1215 cells following 1mM sulindac treatment for 8h preceding the onset of apoptosis. This peptidome separation strategy involved fractional centrifugal ultrafiltration of concentrated cell culture media (CM) using nominal molecular weight membrane filters (NMWL 30K, 3K and 1K). Proteins isolated in the &gt;30K and 3-30K fractions were electrophoretically separated by SDS-PAGE and endogenous peptides in the 1-3K membrane filter were fractioned by RP-HPLC; isolated proteins and peptides were identified by nanoLC-MS-MS. Collectively, our data show that LIM1215 cells treated with 1mM sulindac for 8h secrete decreased levels of proteins associated with extracellular matrix remodeling (e.g., collagens, perlecan, syndecans, filamins, dyneins, metalloproteinases and endopeptidases), cell adhesion (e.g., cadherins, integrins, laminins) and mucosal maintenance (e.g., glycoprotein 340 and mucins 5AC, 6, and 13). A salient finding of this study was the increased proteolysis of cell surface proteins following treatment with sulindac for 8h (40% higher than from untreated LIM1215 cells); several of these endogenous peptides contained C-terminal amino acids from transmembrane domains indicative of regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). Taken together these results indicate that during the early-stage onset of sulindac-induced apoptosis (evidenced by increased annexin V binding, dephosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), and cleavage of caspase-3), 1mM sulindac treatment of LIM1215 cells results in decreased expression of secreted proteins implicated in ECM remodeling, mucosal maintenance and cell-cell-adhesion. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: An Updated Secretome.<newchar>3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide<n-term>CM<n-term>COX<n-term>CRC<n-term>Chemoprevention<n-term>Colon cancer<n-term>ECM<n-term>FA<n-term>FAK<n-term>HNPCC<n-term>Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer<n-term>MMP<n-term>MSI<n-term>MSS<n-term>MTT<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>N(SC)<n-term>NMWC<n-term>NSAID<n-term>PI<n-term>PS<n-term>Peptidome<n-term>R(SC)<n-term>RIP<n-term>SFM<n-term>Secretome<n-term>Sulindac<n-term>colorectal cancer<n-term>culture medium<n-term>cyclooxygenase<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>focal adhesion<n-term>focal adhesion kinase<n-term>microsatellite instable<n-term>microsatellite stable<n-term>nominal molecular weight cut-off<n-term>nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug<n-term>normalized spectral count<n-term>phosphatidylserine<n-term>propidium iodide<n-term>regulated intramembrane proteolysis<n-term>serum-free media<n-term>spectral count fold change ratio<n-term><newabs>23993239<newchar>Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is a clinically silent and potentially fatal disease whose pathophysiology is poorly understood. Application of data derived from animal models and human tissue analysis of abdominal aortic aneurysms may prove misleading given current evidence of structural and biochemical aortic heterogeneity above and below the diaphragm. Genetic predisposition is more common in TAA and includes multi-faceted syndromes such as Marfan, Loeys-Dietz, and type IV Ehlers-Danlos as well as autosomal-dominant familial patterns of inheritance. Investigation into the consequences of these known mutations has provided insight into the cell signaling cascades leading to degenerative remodeling of the aortic medial extracellular matrix (ECM) with TGF-β playing a major role. Targeted research into modifying the upstream regulation or downstream effects of the TGF-β1 pathway may provide opportunities for intervention to attenuate TAA progression.<newchar>AAA<n-term>AT1<n-term>AngII<n-term>ECM<n-term>ERK<n-term>Extracellular matrix remodeling<n-term>MMP<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>TAA<n-term>TGF-β<n-term>TGF-βR1 &amp; 2<n-term>Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm<n-term>Transforming growth factor-beta<n-term>VSMC<n-term>abdominal aortic aneurysm<n-term>angiotensin II<n-term>angiotensin receptor 1<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular signal-regulated kinase<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>t-PA<n-term>thoracic aortic aneurysm<n-term>tissue plasminogen activator<n-term>transforming growth factor beta<n-term>transforming growth factor beta receptor 1 &amp; 2<n-term>vascular smooth muscle cell<n-term><newabs>11824476<newchar>We previously reported that short-term exposure of cultured rat adrenal medullary endothelial cells (RAMEC) to thrombin enhances the subendothelial deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins fibronectin, laminin, and collagen types I (C-I) and IV (C-IV) (Papadimitriou et al. 1997). In this work, we extended our previous studies on factors that effect ECM protein deposition to include agents that activate or inhibit some of the most common intracellular signals such as cAMP, protein kinase C (PKC), and calcium. Furthermore, we investigated the possible link between the observed alterations in ECM protein deposition and the secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2). Forskolin (adenylyl cyclase activator) caused a dose-dependent increase in the deposition of all four ECM proteins studied. Isoproterenol beta-adrenergic receptor agonist) and the membrane permeant cAMP analogue dibutyryl-cAMP significantly increased the deposited amounts of ECM proteins at low concentrations, and this increase was reversed at higher concentrations of both agents. All these agents had the opposite effect on MMP-2 secretion, increasing it at doses where they decreased ECM protein deposition and vice versa. However, elevation of cAMP by the phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX had no effect either on the deposited amounts of any of the ECM proteins studied or on MMP-2 secretion. Activation of PKC by phorbol ester (PMA) resulted in a decrease in ECM protein deposition and an increase in MMP-2 secretion. Finally, chelation of intercellular calcium with BAPTA-AM resulted in an increased ECM deposition and a decrease in MMP-2 secretion. Our results show a complex pattern of regulation of ECM protein deposition by cAMP-mobilizing agents and also indicate an inverse correlation between ECM protein deposition and secretion of MMP-2. The concerted regulation of both of these processes is essential in the formation of new blood vessels, and for the integrity of the vascular wall.<newchar><newabs>25934277<newchar>Absorption evaluation plays an increasingly important role at the early stage of drug discovery due to its potential to scan the ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion) properties of new drug candidates. Therefore, a new three-dimensional (3D) in vitro model replicating the intestinal functioning is herein proposed aiming to dissect the stromal-epithelial interactions and evaluate the permeation of a model drug, insulin. Inspired on the intestinal mucosal architecture, the present model comprises intestinal myofibroblasts (CCD18-Co cells) embedded in Matrigel, onto which epithelial enterocytes (Caco-2 cells) and mucus-producing cells (HT29-MTX cells) were seeded. CCD18-Co myofibroblasts showed to have a central role in the remodeling of the surrounding matrix confirmed by the production of fibronectin. Subsequently, this matrix revealed to be essential to the maintenance of the model architecture by supporting the overlying epithelial cells. In terms of functionality, this model allowed the efficient prediction of insulin permeability in which the presence of mucus, the less tight character between Caco-2 and HT29-MTX epithelial cells and the 3D assembly were critical factors. Concluding, this model constitutes a robust tool in the drug development field with potential to bridge the traditional 2D cell culture models and in vivo animal models.<newchar>Caco-2 cells<n-term>Extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>Fibroblast<n-term>HT29-MTX cells<n-term>Intestinal mucosa<n-term>Triple co-culture<n-term><newabs>18783320<newchar>The porcine small intestine submucosa, an extracellular matrix-derived bioscaffold (ECM-SIS), has been successfully used to enhance the healing of ligaments and tendons. Since the collagen fibers of ECM-SIS have an orientation of +/- 30 degrees , its application in improving the healing of the parallel-fibered ligament and tendon may not be optimal. Therefore, the objective was to improve the collagen fiber alignment of ECM-SIS in vitro with fibroblast seeding and cyclic stretch. The hypothesis was that with the synergistic effects of cell seeding and mechanical stimuli, the collagen fibers in the ECM-SIS can be remodeled and aligned, making it an improved bioscaffold with enhanced conductive properties. Three experimental groups were established: group I (n = 14), ECM-SIS was seeded with fibroblasts and cyclically stretched; group II (n = 13), ECM-SIS was seeded with fibroblasts but not cyclically stretched; and group III (n = 8), ECM-SIS was not seeded with fibroblasts but cyclically stretched. After 5 days' experiments, the scaffolds from all the three groups (n = 9 for group I; n = 8 for groups II and III) were processed for quantification of the collagen fiber orientation with a small-angle light scattering (SALS) system. For groups I and II, in which the scaffolds were seeded with fibroblasts, the cell morphology and orientation and newly produced collagen fibrils were examined with confocal fluorescent microscopy (n = 3/group) and transmission electronic microscopy (n = 2/group). The results revealed that the collagen fiber orientation in group I was more aligned closer to the stretching direction when compared to the other two groups. The mean angle decreased from 25.3 degrees to 7.1 degrees (p &lt; 0.05), and the associated angular dispersion was also reduced (37.4 degrees vs. 18.5 degrees , p &lt; 0.05). In contrast, groups II and III demonstrated minimal changes. The cells in group I were more aligned in the stretching direction than those in group II. Newly produced collagen fibrils could be observed along the cells in both groups I and II. This study demonstrated that a combination of fibroblast seeding and cyclic stretch could remodel and align the collagen fiber orientation in ECM-SIS bioscaffolds. The better-aligned ECM-SIS has the prospect of eliciting improved effects on enhancing the healing of ligaments and tendons.<newchar><newabs>11824471<newchar>We previously reported that short term exposure of cultured rat adrenal medullary endothelial cells (RAMEC) to thrombin enhances the subendothelial deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins fibronectin, laminin, and collagen types I (C-I) and IV (C-IV) (Papadimitriou et at., 1997). In this work, we extended our previous studies on factors that affect ECM protein deposition to include agents that activate or inhibit some of the most common intracellular signals such as cAMP, protein kinase C (PKC) and calcium. Furthemore, we investigated the possible link between the observed alterations in ECM protein deposition and the secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2). Forskolin (adenylyl cyclase activator) caused a dose-dependent increase in the deposition of all four ECM proteins studied. Isoproterenol (beta-adrenergic receptor agonist) and the membrane-permeant cAMP analogue dibutyryl-cAMP, significantly increased the deposited amounts of ECM proteins at low concentrations, and this increase was reversed at higher concentrations of both agents. All these agents had the opposite effect on MMP-2 secretion, increasing it at doses where they decreased ECM protein deposition and vice-versa. However, elevation of cAMP by the phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX had no effect neither on the deposited amounts of any of the ECM proteins studied nor on MMP-2 secretion. Activation of PKC by phorbol ester (PMA) resulted in a decrease in ECM protein deposition and an increase in MMP-2 secretion. Finally, chelation of intercellular calcium with BAPTA-AM resulted in an increased ECM deposition and a decrease in MMP-2 secretion, Our results show a complex pattern of regulation of ECM protein deposition by cAMP-mobilizing agents, and also indicate an inverse correlation between ECM protein deposition and secretion of MMP-2. The concerted regulation of both these processes is essential in the formation of new blood vessels and for the integrity of the vascular wall.<newchar><newabs>20727881<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling regulates multiple cellular functions required for normal development and tissue repair. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key mediators of this process and membrane targeted MMPs (MT-MMPs) in particular have been shown to be important in normal development of specific organs. In this study we investigated the role of MT1-MMP in kidney development. We demonstrate that loss of MT1-MMP leads to a renal phenotype characterized by a moderate decrease in ureteric bud branching morphogenesis and a severe proliferation defect. The kidneys of MT1-MMP-null mice have increased deposition of collagen IV, laminins, perlecan, and nidogen and the phenotype is independent of the MT-1MMP target, MMP-2. Utilizing in vitro systems we demonstrated that MTI-MMP proteolytic activity is required for renal tubule cells to proliferate in three dimensional matrices and to migrate on collagen IV and laminins. Together these data suggest an important role for MT1-MMP in kidney development, which is mediated by its ability to regulate cell proliferation and migration by proteolytically cleaving kidney basement membrane components.<newchar><newabs>24969477<newchar>A growing number of failing clinical trials for cancer therapy are substantiating the need to upgrade the current practice in culturing tumor cells and modeling tumor angiogenesis in vitro. Many attempts have been made to engineer vasculature in vitro by utilizing hydrogels, but the application of these tools in simulating in vivo tumor angiogenesis is still very new. In this review, we explore current use of hydrogels and their design parameters to engineer vasculogenesis and angiogenesis and to evaluate the angiogenic capability of cancerous cells and tissues. By coupling these hydrogels with other technologies such as lithography and three-dimensional printing, one can create an advanced microvessel model as microfluidic channels to more accurately capture the native angiogenesis process.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>ECM remodeling<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Three-dimensional cell culture<n-term>Tumor modeling<n-term><newabs>24999352<newchar>Glial cells in the central nervous system (CNS) contribute to formation of the extracellular matrix, which provides adhesive sites, signaling molecules, and a diffusion barrier to enhance efficient neurotransmission and axon potential propagation. In the normal adult CNS the extracellular matrix (ECM) is relatively stable except in select regions characterized by dynamic remodeling. However, after trauma such as a spinal cord injury or cortical contusion, the lesion epicenter becomes a focus of acute neuroinflammation. The activation of the surrounding glial cells leads to a dramatic change in the composition of the ECM at the edges of the lesion, creating a perilesion environment dominated by growth inhibitory molecules and restoration of the peripheral/central nervous system border. An advantage of this response is to limit the invasion of damaging cells and diffusion of toxic molecules into the spared tissue regions, but this occurs at the cost of inhibiting migration of endogenous repair cells and preventing axonal regrowth. The following review will highlight structural and functional features of the normal adult CNS ECM and then focus on the reactions of glial cells and changes in the perilesion border that occur following spinal cord or contusive brain injury. Current research strategies directed at modifying the inhibitory perilesion microenvironment without eliminating the protective functions of glial cell activation are discussed.<newchar>astrocyte<n-term>axon growth<n-term>contusion<n-term>glial scar<n-term>inflammation<n-term>inhibitory<n-term>macrophage<n-term>proteoglycan<n-term>regeneration<n-term>spinal cord injury<n-term><newabs>22416916<newchar>Biologic scaffold materials composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) have been shown to promote the formation of site-specific, functional, host tissue following placement in a number of preclinical and clinical studies. Endotoxin contamination of biomaterials is thought to result in deleterious immune responses that may affect the remodeling outcome when present in significant quantities. However, the exact amount of endotoxin contamination within or upon an ECM-based biologic scaffold that is required to elicit adverse effects in recipients is currently unknown. The present study examined the in vitro and in vivo effects of endotoxin contamination within an ECM scaffold derived from porcine dermis upon the host immune response and the downstream ability of the scaffold material to promote constructive tissue remodeling. Test articles with endotoxin values that exceed the current U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) limit had similar or decreased immune responses both in vitro and in vivo when compared with devices that were below the current FDA limit. Dermal matrices spiked with large doses of endotoxin (100 ng/mL), equivalent to 10-20 times the FDA limit, elicited a robust immune response in vitro. However, by 35 days postimplantation, no difference in tissue remodeling was detected, regardless of the amount of endotoxin present within the material. These results suggest that current endotoxin standards may fall well below levels that induce an adverse acute proinflammatory response and associated long-term deleterious effects upon tissue remodeling outcomes.<newchar><newabs>22714107<newchar>During early placentation, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play important roles in decidualization, trophoblast migration, invasion, angiogenesis, vascularization and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling of the endometrium. The aim of our study was to analyze the localization, distribution and differential expression of MMP-2 and -9 in the organogenic implantation site and to evaluate in vivo and in vitro decidual MMP-2 and -9 activities on day 10 of gestation in CF-1 mouse. Whole extracts for Western blotting of organogenic E10-decidua expressed MMP-2 and -9 isoforms. MMP-2 immunoreactivity was found in a granular and discrete pattern in ECM of mesometrial decidua (MD) near maternal blood vessels and slightly in non-decidualized endometrium (NDE). Immunoexpression of MMP-9 was also detected in NDE, in cytoplasm of decidual cells and ECM of vascular MD, in trophoblastic area and in growing antimesometrial deciduum. Gelatin zymography showed that MMP-9 activity was significantly lower in CM compared to the active form of direct (not cultured) and cultured decidua. The decidual active MMP-9 was significantly higher than the active MMP-2. These results show differential localization, protein expression and enzymatic activation of MMPs, suggesting specific roles for MMP-2 and MMP-9 in decidual and trophoblast tissues related to organogenic ECM remodeling and vascularization during early establishment of mouse placentation.<newchar><newabs>25153404<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) and are therefore of interest for new diagnostic tools for the clinical management of diseases involving ECM disruption. This setting ranges from the classical areas of MMP studies, such as vascular disease, cancer progression or bone disorders, to new emerging fields of application, such as neurodegenerative disease or sepsis. Increasing the knowledge about the role of MMPs in the pathogenesis of diseases where a clear diagnostic panel is still lacking could provide new insight and improve the identification and the clinical treatment of these human diseases. This review focuses on the latest descriptions of the clinical use of MMP as biomarkers in the diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring of different diseases, such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancer and metastasis, neurodegenerative disorders and sepsis.<newchar><newabs>17919732<newchar>Interactions between cells and extracellular matrix (ECM), in particular the basement membrane (BM), are fundamentally important for the regulation of a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) play critical roles in ECM remodeling and/or regulation of cell-ECM interactions because of their ability to cleave protein components of the ECM. Of particular interest among MMP is stromelysin-3 (ST3), which was first isolated from a human breast cancer and also shown to be correlated with apoptosis during development and invasion of tumor cells in mammals. We have been using intestinal remodeling during thyroid hormone (TH)-dependent amphibian metamorphosis as a model to study the role of ST3 during post-embryonic tissue remodeling and organ development in vertebrates. This process involves complete degeneration of the tadpole or larval epithelium through apoptosis and de novo development of the adult epithelium. Here, we will first summarize expression studies by us and others showing a tight spatial and temporal correlation of the expression of ST3 mRNA and protein with larval cell death and adult tissue development. We will then review in vitro and in vivo data supporting a critical role of ST3 in TH-induced larval epithelial cell death and ECM remodeling. We will further discuss the potential mechanisms of ST3 function during metamorphosis and its broader implications.<newchar><newabs>25721513<newchar>The role of inflammation in tendon injury is uncertain and a topic of current interest. In vitro studies of tendon accelerated overload damage can serve as a valuable source of information on the early stages of tendinopathy. Viable fascicle bundles from bovine flexor tendons were subjected to cyclic uniaxial loading from 1-10% strain. Immuno-staining for inflammatory markers and matrix degradation markers was performed on the samples after mechanical testing. Loaded samples exhibited visible extracellular matrix damage, with disrupted collagen fibers and fiber kinks, and notable damage to the interfascicular matrix. Inflammatory markers COX-2 and IL-6 were only expressed in the cyclically loaded samples. Collagen degradation markers MMP-1 and C1,2C were colocalized in many areas, with staining occurring in the interfascicular matrix or the fascicular tenocytes. These markers were present in control samples, but staining became increasingly intense with loading. Little MMP-3 or MMP-13 was evident in control sections. In loaded samples, some sections showed intense staining of these markers, again localized to interfascicular regions. This study suggests that inflammatory markers may be expressed rapidly after tendon overload exercise. Interestingly, both inflammation and damage-induced matrix remodeling seem to be concentrated in, or in the vicinity of, the highly cellular interfascicular matrix.<newchar>ECM damage<n-term>collagen<n-term>fatigue<n-term>inflammation<n-term>interfascicular matrix<n-term>matrix degradation<n-term>tendon<n-term><newabs>21807843<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for all stages of angiogenesis. In the adult, angiogenesis begins with endothelial cell (EC) activation, degradation of vascular basement membrane, and vascular sprouting within interstitial matrix. During this sprouting phase, ECM binding to integrins provides critical signaling support for EC proliferation, survival, and migration. ECM also signals the EC cytoskeleton to initiate blood vessel morphogenesis. Dynamic remodeling of ECM, particularly by membrane-type matrix metalloproteases (MT-MMPs), coordinates formation of vascular tubes with lumens and provides guidance tunnels for pericytes that assist ECs in the assembly of vascular basement membrane. ECM also provides a binding scaffold for a variety of cytokines that exert essential signaling functions during angiogenesis. In the embryo, ECM is equally critical for angiogenesis and vessel stabilization, although there are likely important distinctions from the adult because of differences in composition and abundance of specific ECM components.<newchar><newabs>19929220<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a process that is crucial to the development of embryos, the growth and metastasis of tumors, and wound healing and homeostasis of tissues in adults. As such, it involves dozens of gene products that are regulated by mechanisms operating at transcriptional and multiple posttranslational levels. This complexity of regulation has made the development of a comprehensive understanding of the biology of ECM remodeling in vivo an unusually challenging task, yet such an understanding would be of profound value to our knowledge of and clinical approaches to the treatment of many cancers. The primary effectors of ECM remodeling are the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Homologs of this gene family have been identified in every metazoan examined. We propose that the zebrafish embryo is an ideal system for the study of the regulation of MMP activity, and we present some progress we have made in the development of this organism as a platform for MMP research. We have identified 25 genes encoding MMPs in the zebrafish genome, and 5 genes encoding their endogenous inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of MMPs. Based on a phylogenetic analysis, we have identified the most probable homologies of these sequences and found that there are two that are of equivocal identity. We have developed 17 antibodies specific to zebrafish MMPs and have begun characterizing the ontogeny of these molecules. Finally, we have developed two novel assays that allow the detection and characterization of active MMPs in vivo (differential in vivo zymography and activity-based protease profiling). In combination with the array of powerful biochemical, genomic, cell, and molecular biological techniques available to zebrafish researchers already, we feel that these new reagents and techniques make the zebrafish the best model system for the study of MMP regulation currently available.<newchar><newabs>23806015<newchar>Mimicking the complicated anisotropic structures of a native tissue is extremely important in tissue engineering. In a previous study, we developed an anisotropic collagen gel scaffold (ACGS) having a hierarchical structure and a properties gradient. In this study, our objective was to see how cells remodel the scaffolds through the cells-ACGS interaction. For this purpose, we cultured osteoblastic cells on ACGS, which we regarded as a model system for the cells-extracellular matrix (cell-ECM) interaction. Changes in the ACGS-cell composites structure by cell-ECM interactions was investigated from a macroscopic level to a microscopic level. Osteoblastic cells were also cultured on an isotropic collagen gel (ICGS) as a control. During the cultivation, mechanical stimuli were applied to collagen-cell composites for adequate matrix remodeling. Confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) was used to observe macroscopic changes in the ACGS-cell composite structure by osteoblastic cells. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements were performed to characterize microscopic structural changes in the composites. Macroscopic observations using CLSM revealed that osteoblastic cells remained only in the diluted phase in ACGS and they collected collagen fibrils or formed a toroidal structure, depending on the depth from the ACGS surface in the tubular diluted phase. The cells were uniformly distributed in ICGS. SAXS analysis suggests that collagen fibrils were remodeled by osteoblastic cells, and this remodeling process would be affected by the structure difference between ACGS and ICGS. These results suggest that we directly regulate cell-ECM interaction by the unique anisotropic and hierarchical structure of ACGS. The cell-gel composite presented in this study would promise an efficient scaffold material in tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>24810466<newchar>The mechanisms of action underlying the pharmacological properties of the natural alkaloid berberine still need investigation. Planarian regeneration is instrumental in deciphering developmental responses following drug exposure. Here we report the effects of berberine on regeneration in the planarian Dugesia japonica. Our findings demonstrate that this compound perturbs the regenerative pattern. By real-time PCR screening for the effects of berberine exposure on gene expression, we identified alterations in the transcriptional profile of genes representative of different tissues, as well as of genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Although berberine does not influence cell proliferation/apoptosis, our experiments prove that this compound causes abnormal regeneration of the planarian visual system. Potential berberine-induced cytotoxic effects were noticed in the intestine. Although we were unable to detect abnormalities in other structures, our findings, sustained by RNAi-based investigations, support the possibility that berberine effects are critically linked to anomalous ECM remodeling in treated planarians.<newchar><newabs>27098600<newchar>Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) plays an important role on fibrogenesis in heart disease. MicroRNAs have exhibited as crucial regulators of cardiac homeostasis and remodeling in various heart diseases. MiR-19a-3p/19b-3p expresses with low levels in the plasma of heart failure patients. The purpose of our study is to determine the role of MiR-19a-3p/19b-3p in regulating autophagy-mediated fibrosis of human cardiac fibroblasts. We elucidate our hypothesis in clinical samples and human cardiac fibroblasts (HCF) to provide valuable basic information. TGF-β1 promotes collagen I α2 and fibronectin synthesis in HCF and that is paralleled by autophagic activation in these cells. Pharmacological inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine decreases the fibrotic response, while autophagy induction of rapamycin increases the response. BECN1 knockdown and Atg5 over-expression either inhibits or enhances the fibrotic effect of TGF-β1 in experimental HCF. Furthermore, miR-19a-3p/19b-3p mimics inhibit epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and extracellular matrix (ECM) prodution and invasion of HCF. Functional studies suggest that miR-19a-3p/19b-3p inhibits autophagy of HCF through targeting TGF-β R II mRNA. Moreover, enhancement of autophagy rescues inhibition effect of miR-19a-3p/19b-3p on Smad 2 and Akt phosphorylation through TGF-β R II signaling. Our study uncovers a novel mechanism that miR-19a-3p/19b-3p inhibits autophagy-mediated fibrogenesis by targeting TGF-β R II.<newchar><newabs>25477952<newchar>Corneal stromal fibrosis characterized by myofibroblasts and abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) is usually the result of inappropriate wound healing. The present study tested the hypothesis that the ligand activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) δ had antifibrosis effects in a rat model of corneal damage. Adult Sprague-Dawley rats underwent bilateral phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK). The eyes were randomized into four groups: PBS, GW501516 (a selective agonist of PPARδ), GSK3787 (a selective antagonist of PPARδ), or GW501516 combined with GSK3787. The agents were subconjunctivally administered twice a week until sacrifice. The cellular aspects of corneal wound healing were evaluated with in vivo confocal imaging and postmortem histology. A myofibroblast marker (α-smooth muscle actin) and ECM production (fibronectin, collagen type III and collagen type I) were examined by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. At the early stages of wound healing, GW501516 inhibited reepithelialization and promoted angiogenesis. During the remodeling phase of wound healing, GW501516 attenuated the activation and proliferation of keratocytes, which could be reversed by GSK3787. GW501516 decreased transdifferentiation from keratocytes into myofibroblasts, ECM synthesis, and corneal haze. These results demonstrate that GW501516 controls corneal fibrosis and suggest that PPARδ may potentially serve as a therapeutic target for treating corneal scars.<newchar><newabs>24092434<newchar>Tumors are microecosystems in which a continuous cross talk between cancer cells and host cells decides on the invasive behavior of the tumor cell population as a whole (Mareel et al., Encyclopedia of cancer, San Diego, CA, Academic Press, 1997). Both compartments secrete activating and inhibitory factors that modulate activities such as cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interaction, cell-cell adhesion, remodeling of the ECM, and cell motility. For this reason, confrontations of cancer cells with a living normal host tissue in organ culture have been introduced by several groups: Wolff and Schneider in France (Wolff and Schneider, C R S Soc Biol (Paris) 151:1291-1292, 1957), Easty and Easty in the United Kingdom (Easty and Easty, Nature 199:1104-1105, 1963), and Schleich in Germany (Schleich et al., J Natl Cancer Inst 56:221-237, 1976). Embryonic chick heart fragments in organ culture maintain many histological features of their tissue of origin: They are composed of myocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells, and their ECM contains fibronectin, laminin, and several collagen types. Moreover, the fragments remain contractile, and this activity allows the monitoring of their functional integrity during organ culture.<newchar><newabs>24898588<newchar>The twenty-five known matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases (TIMPs), mediate cell invasion through the extracellular matrix (ECM). In a comparative three-dimensional assay, we analyzed human and mouse satellite cells' competence to invade an artificial ECM (collagen I). We identified a single MMP that 1) is expressed by human muscle satellite cells; 2) is induced at the mRNA/protein level by adhesion to collagen I; and 3) is necessary for invasion into a collagen I matrix. Interestingly, murine satellite cells neither express this MMP, nor invade the collagen matrix. However, exogenous human MMP-14 is not sufficient to induce invasion of a collagen matrix by murine cells, emphasizing species differences.<newchar>MMP-14<n-term>cellular invasion<n-term>collagen remodeling<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>muscle regeneration<n-term>satellite cells<n-term>skeletal muscle<n-term><newabs>24637853<newchar>Hypertrophic scars are associated with prolonged extracellular matrix (ECM) production, aberrant ECM degradation and high tissue cellularity. Routinely used antifibrotic strategies aim to reduce ECM deposition and enhance matrix remodeling. Our previous study investigating the antifibrotic effects of indoleamine2, 3 dioxygenase (IDO) led to the identification of kynurenine (Kyn) as an antiscarring agent. A topical antifibrogenic therapy using Kyn is very attractive; however, it is well established that Kyn passes the blood brain barrier (BBB) which causes complications including excitatory neuronal death. Here we investigated the antiscarring properties of kynurenic acid (KynA), a downstream end product of Kyn that is unlikely to pass the BBB, as an effective and safe replacement for Kyn. Our results indicated that while not having any adverse effect on dermal cell viability, KynA significantly increases the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP1 and MMP3) and suppresses the production of type-I collagen and fibronectin by fibroblasts. Topical application of cream containing KynA in fibrotic rabbit ear significantly decreased scar elevation index (1.13±0.13 vs. 1.61±0.12) and tissue cellularity (221.38±21.7 vs. 314.56±8.66 cells/hpf) in KynA treated wounds compared to controls. KynA treated wounds exhibited lower levels of collagen deposition which is accompanied with a significant decrease in type-I collagen and fibronectin expression, as well as an increase in MMP1 expression compared to untreated wounds or wounds treated with cream only. The results of this study provided evidence for the first time that KynA is promising candidate antifibrogenic agent to improve healing outcome in patients at risk of hypertrophic scarring.<newchar><newabs>22137126<newchar>Biologic scaffold materials composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are routinely used for a variety of clinical applications. Despite known variations in tissue remodeling outcomes, quantitative criteria by which decellularization can be assessed were only recently described and as a result, the amount of retained cellular material varies widely among commercial products. The objective of this study was to evaluate the consequences of ineffective decellularization on the host response. Three different methods of decellularization were used to decellularize porcine small intestinal ECM (SIS-ECM). The amount of cell remnants was quantified by the amount and fragmentation of DNA within the scaffold materials. The M1/M2 phenotypic polarization profile of macrophages, activated in response to these ECM scaffolds, was assessed in vitro and in vivo using a rodent model of body wall repair. The results show that, in vitro, more aggressive decellularization is associated with a shift in macrophage phenotype predominance from M1 to M2. While this shift was not quantitatively apparent in vivo, notable differences were found in the distribution of M1 vs. M2 macrophages within the various scaffolds. A clear association between macrophage phenotype and remodeling outcome exists and effective decellularization remains an important component in the processing of ECM-based scaffolds.<newchar><newabs>18442708<newchar>Almost all tissues in our body contain specific cells associated with the tissue itself, and an extracellular matrix (ECM) that consists of a variety of proteins of which the bulk is formed by different types of collagens, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. The ECM plays a pivotal role in numerous processes not only related to the mechanical properties of a tissue, but also in modulating cellular activity. For a proper functioning of a tissue remodeling of the ECM is essential. Some connective tissues are characterized by a very rapid turnover (e.g. periodontal ligament) whereas others hardly show signs of turnover (e.g. cartilage). In all situations degradation of the ECM constituents occur. Under certain conditions, especially during a pathological situation, a high level of degradation may take place. In other situations matrix synthesis and deposition outstrips breakdown, leading to a fibrosis. In order to obtain information on the level of degradation of the different ECM components, various methods have been employed. A number of these methods will be discussed in this article.<newchar><newabs>24737953<newchar>Colorectal cancer dissemination depends on extracellular matrix genes related to remodeling and degradation of the matrix structure. This investigation intended to evaluate the association between FN-1, ITGA-3, ITGB-5, MMP-2, and MMP-9 gene and protein expression levels in tumor tissue with clinical and histopathological neoplastic parameters of cancer dissemination. The expression associations between ECM molecules and selected epithelial markers EGFR, VEGF, Bcl2, P53, and KI-67 have also been examined in 114 patients with colorectal cancer who underwent primary tumor resection. Quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry tissue microarray methods were performed in samples from the primary tumors. The gene expression results showed that the ITGA-3 and ITGB-5 genes were overexpressed in tumors with lymph node and distant metastasis (III/IV-stage tumors compared with I/II tumors). The MMP-2 gene showed significant overexpression in mucinous type tumors, and MMP-9 was overexpressed in villous adenocarcinoma histologic type tumors. The ECM genes MMP9 and ITGA-3 have shown a significant expression correlation with EGFR epithelial marker. The overexpression of the matrix extracellular genes ITGA-3 and ITGB-5 is associated with advanced stage tumors, and the genes MMP-2 and MMP-9 are overexpressed in mucinous and villous adenocarcinoma type tumors, respectively. The epithelial marker EGFR overactivity has been shown to be associated with the ECM genes MMP-9 and ITGA-3 expression.<newchar><newabs>25295599<newchar>Heparanase is a β-D-endoglucuronidase that cleaves heparan sulfate (HS), facilitating degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the release of HS-bound biomolecules including cytokines. The remodeling of the ECM by heparanase is important for various physiological and pathological processes, including inflammation, wound healing, tumour angiogenesis and metastasis. Although heparanase has been proposed to facilitate leukocyte migration through degradation of the ECM, its role in inflammation by regulating the expression and release of cytokines has not been fully defined. In this study, the role of heparanase in regulating the expression and release of cytokines from human and murine immune cells was examined. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells treated ex vivo with heparanase resulted in the release of a range of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 and TNF. In addition, mouse splenocytes treated ex vivo with heparanase resulted in the release of IL-6, MCP-1 and TNF. A similar pattern of cytokine release was also observed when cells were treated with soluble HS. Furthermore, heparanase-induced cytokine release was abolished by enzymatic-inhibitors of heparanase, suggesting this process is mediated via the enzymatic release of cell surface HS fragments. As soluble HS can signal through the Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathway, heparanase may promote the upregulation of cytokines through the generation of heparanase-cleaved fragments of HS. In support of this hypothesis, mouse spleen cells lacking the key TLR adaptor molecule MyD88 demonstrated an abolition of cytokine release after heparanase stimulation. Furthermore, TLR4-deficient spleen cells showed reduced cytokine release in response to heparanase treatment, suggesting that TLR4 is involved in this response. Consistent with these observations, the pathway involved in cytokine upregulation was identified as being NF-κB-dependent. These data identify a new mechanism for heparanase in promoting the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines that is likely to be important in regulating cell migration and inflammation.<newchar><newabs>24959312<newchar>Epidemiological studies suggest sex-specific trends in the prevalence and mortality of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that are distinct for each disease. While the expression of numerous immune and extracellular matrix (ECM) genes in the lung have been well characterized in these diseases, associations elucidating their sex-specific expression patterns by disease type and severity, and the evaluation of hormone-related genes, have not been well studied. Here we performed targeted transcriptional profiling of 48 genes was performed on lung tissue samples from males and females with mild or medium severity IPF or COPD. The genes assessed included those involved in inflammation, ECM remodeling and hormonal processes. Data for 36 lung tissue samples were obtained that were stratified by disease and sex. Expression levels revealed a subset of genes which show differential expression among sexes, disease type, and disease severity. The most significant observations were the increased expression primarily of ECM genes in medium severity IPF (CATHK, COL1A1, COL3, MMP1, MMP7, IL-1RN) compared to mild IPF and COPD. Two genes, CH3L1 and MMP7 showed a tendency of interaction between sex and disease in IPF severity. Surprisingly, there were no significant differences in any of the sex genes measured between the IPF groups; however, ESR1 and AR expression levels were higher and lower, respectively, compared to COPD samples. Overall, this work highlights two genes, CH3L1 and MMP7, that may contribute to gender trends observed for IPF and COPD and are potential targets for future research.<newchar>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis<n-term>chitinase 3-like 1<n-term>chronic obstructive pulmonary disease<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>gene profiles<n-term>inflammation<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase 7<n-term>steroids<n-term><newabs>26247610<newchar>Fibroblasts are critical for wound contraction; a pivotal step in wound healing. They produce and modify the extracellular matrix (ECM) required for the proper tissue remodeling. Reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs (RECK) is a key regulator of ECM homeostasis and turnover. However, its role in wound contraction is presently unknown. Here we describe that Transforming growth factor type β1 (TGF-β1), one of the main pro-fibrotic wound-healing promoting factors, decreases RECK expression in fibroblasts through the Smad and JNK dependent pathways. This TGF-β1 dependent downregulation of RECK occurs with the concomitant increase of β1-integrin, which is required for fibroblasts adhesion and wound contraction through the activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK). Loss and gain RECK expression experiments performed in different types of fibroblasts indicate that RECK downregulation mediates TGF-β1 dependent β1-integrin expression. Also, reduced levels of RECK potentiate TGF-β1 effects over fibroblasts FAK-dependent contraction, without affecting its cognate signaling. The above results were confirmed on fibroblasts derived from the Reck+/- mice compared to wild type-derived fibroblasts. We observed that Reck+/- mice heal dermal wounds more efficiently than wild type mice. Our results reveal a critical role for RECK in skin wound contraction as a key mediator in the axis: TGF-β1-RECK-β1-integrin.<newchar><newabs>26745663<newchar>The objective of the present review is to synthesize the information on the cellular and molecular players responsible for maintaining a homeostatic balance between a naturally invasive human placenta and the maternal uterus in pregnancy; to review the roles of decorin (DCN) as a molecular player in this homeostasis; to list the common maladies associated with a break-down in this homeostasis, resulting from a hypo-invasive or hyper-invasive placenta, and their underlying mechanisms. We show that both the fetal components of the placenta, represented primarily by the extravillous trophoblast, and the maternal component represented primarily by the decidual tissue and the endometrial arterioles, participate actively in this balance. We discuss the process of uterine angiogenesis in the context of uterine arterial changes during normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. We compare and contrast trophoblast growth and invasion with the processes involved in tumorigenesis with special emphasis on the roles of DCN and raise important questions that remain to be addressed. Decorin (DCN) is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan produced by stromal cells, including dermal fibroblasts, chondrocytes, chorionic villus mesenchymal cells and decidual cells of the pregnant endometrium. It contains a 40 kDa protein core having 10 leucine-rich repeats covalently linked with a glycosaminoglycan chain. Biological functions of DCN include: collagen assembly, myogenesis, tissue repair and regulation of cell adhesion and migration by binding to ECM molecules or antagonising multiple tyrosine kinase receptors (TKR) including EGFR, IGF-IR, HGFR and VEGFR-2. DCN restrains angiogenesis by binding to thrombospondin-1, TGFβ, VEGFR-2 and possibly IGF-IR. DCN can halt tumor growth by antagonising oncogenic TKRs and restraining angiogenesis. DCN actions at the fetal-maternal interface include restraint of trophoblast migration, invasion and uterine angiogenesis. We demonstrate that DCN overexpression in the decidua is associated with preeclampsia (PE); this may have a causal role in PE by compromising endovascular differentiation of the trophoblast and uterine angiogenesis, resulting in poor arterial remodeling. Elevated DCN level in the maternal blood is suggested as a potential biomarker in PE.<newchar>adhesion<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>decidua<n-term>decorin<n-term>extravillous trophoblast<n-term>invasion<n-term>leucine rich proteoglycan<n-term>migration<n-term>placenta<n-term>preeclampsia<n-term>trophoblast<n-term>tumor growth and metastasis<n-term>tyrosine kinase receptors<n-term><newabs>25725554<newchar>Valvular interstitial cells (VICs) are active regulators of valve homeostasis and disease, responsible for secreting and remodeling the valve tissue matrix. As a result of VIC activity, the valve modulus can substantially change during development, injury and repair, and disease progression. While two-dimensional biomaterial substrates have been used to study mechanosensing and its influence on VIC phenotype, less is known about how these cells respond to matrix modulus in a three-dimensional environment. Here, we synthesized MMP-degradable poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogels with elastic moduli ranging from 0.24 kPa to 12 kPa and observed that cell morphology was constrained in stiffer gels. To vary gel stiffness without substantially changing cell morphology, cell-laden hydrogels were cultured in the 0.24 kPa gels for 3 days to allow VIC spreading, and then stiffened in situ via a second, photoinitiated thiol-ene polymerization such that the gel modulus increased from 0.24 kPa to 1.2 kPa or 13 kPa. VICs encapsulated within soft gels exhibited αSMA stress fibers (∼ 40%), a hallmark of the myofibroblast phenotype. Interestingly, in stiffened gels, VICs became deactivated to a quiescent fibroblast phenotype, suggesting that matrix stiffness directs VIC phenotype independent of morphology, but in a manner that depends on the dimensionality of the culture platform. Collectively, these studies present a versatile method for dynamic stiffening of hydrogels and demonstrate the significant effects of matrix modulus on VIC myofibroblast properties in three-dimensional environments.<newchar>ECM<n-term>Elasticity<n-term>Heart valve<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Three-dimensional cell culture<n-term>Valvular interstitial cells<n-term><newabs>26539695<newchar>The spatial organization of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling is a key determinant of vascular patterning during development and tissue repair. How VEGF signaling becomes spatially restricted and the role of VEGF secreting astrocytes in this process remains poorly understood. Using a VEGF-GFP fusion protein and confocal time-lapse microscopy, we observed the intracellular routing, secretion and immobilization of VEGF in scratch-activated living astrocytes. We found VEGF to be directly transported to cell-extracellular matrix attachments where it is incorporated into fibronectin fibrils. VEGF accumulated at β1 integrin containing fibrillar adhesions and was translocated along the cell surface prior to internalization and degradation. We also found that only the astrocyte-derived, matrix-bound, and not soluble VEGF decreases β1 integrin turnover in fibrillar adhesions. We suggest that polarized VEGF release and ECM remodeling by VEGF secreting cells is key to control the local concentration and signaling of VEGF. Our findings highlight the importance of astrocytes in directing VEGF functions and identify these mechanisms as promising target for angiogenic approaches.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibrillar adhesion<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>growth factor signaling<n-term><newabs>25485989<newchar>The function of follicle-stimulating hormone (Fsh) during oogenesis in fishes is poorly understood. Using coho salmon as a fish model, we recently identified a suite of genes regulated by Fsh in vitro and involved in ovarian processes mostly unexplored in fishes, like cell proliferation, differentiation, survival or extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. To better understand the role of these Fsh-regulated genes during oocyte growth in fishes, we characterized their mRNA levels at discrete stages of the ovarian development in coho salmon. While most of the transcripts were expressed at low levels during primary growth (perinucleolus stage), high expression of genes associated with cell proliferation (pim1, pcna, and mcm4) and survival (ddit4l) was found in follicles at this stage. The transition to secondary oocyte growth (cortical alveolus and lipid droplet stage ovarian follicles) was characterized by a marked increase in the expression of genes related to cell survival (clu1, clu2 and ivns1abpa). Expression of genes associated with cell differentiation and growth (wt2l and adh8l), growth factor signaling (inha), steroidogenesis (cyp19a1a) and the ECM (col1a1, col1a2 and dcn) peaked in vitellogenic follicles, showing a strong and positive correlation with transcripts for fshr. Other genes regulated by Fsh and associated with ECM function (ctgf, wapl and fn1) and growth factor signaling (bmp16 and smad5l) peaked in maturing follicles, along with increases in steroidogenesis-related gene transcripts. In conclusion, ovarian genes regulated by Fsh showed marked differences in their expression patterns during oogenesis in coho salmon. Our results suggest that Fsh regulates different ovarian processes at specific stages of development, likely through interaction with other intra- or extra-ovarian factors.<newchar><newabs>26321962<newchar>Obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes are associated with a substantially increased prevalence of vascular fibrosis and stiffness, with attendant increased risk of cardiovascular and chronic kidney disease. Although the underlying mechanisms and mediators of vascular stiffness are not well understood, accumulating evidence supports the role of metabolic and immune dysregulation related to increased adiposity, activation of the renin angiotensin aldosterone system, reduced bioavailable nitric oxide, increased vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM remodeling in the pathogenesis of vascular stiffness. This review will give a brief overview of the relationship between obesity, insulin resistance and increased vascular stiffness to provide a contemporary understanding of the proposed underlying mechanisms and potential therapeutic strategies.<newchar>cardiovascular disease<n-term>insulin resistance<n-term>obesity<n-term>vascular resistance<n-term><newabs>23475766<newchar>The addition of streptolysin-O (SLO) to the standard antibiotics regimen was shown to be superior to antibiotics alone after experimental infection of foals with Rhodoccocus equi (R. equi). The objective of this study is to investigate this response by determining the site-specific expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) and inflammatory response genes in biopsy samples taken from three distinct lung regions of the infected foals. Twenty-four foals were challenged by intrabronchial instillation of R. equi and assigned to four treatment groups: SLO/antibiotics adjunct therapy, antibiotics-only therapy (7.5 mg/kg clarithromycin and 5 mg/kg rifampin), SLO-only, and saline-only treatments. Treatments were administered twice daily for 16 days unless symptoms progressed to the point where the foals needed to be euthanized. Gene expressions were determined using custom-designed equine real-time qPCR arrays containing forty-eight genes from ECM remodeling and inflammation pathways. A non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test for independent samples was applied to two pairs of time-matched comparison groups, SLO/antibiotics vs. antibiotics-only and SLO-only vs. saline-only, to document the significant differences in gene expressions within these groups. Several genes, MMP9, MMP2, TIMP2, COL1A1, COL12A1, ITGAL, ITGB1, FN1, CCL2, CCL3, CXCL9, TNFα, SMAD7, CD40, IL10, TGFB1, and TLR2, were significantly regulated compared to the unchallenged/untreated control foals. The results of this study demonstrate that enhancement of clinical responses by SLO is consistent with the changes in expression of critical genes in ECM remodeling and inflammatory response pathways.<newchar><newabs>25554798<newchar>The purpose of this study was to compare the gene expression profile of mouse skeletal muscle undergoing two forms of growth (hypertrophy and regrowth) with the goal of identifying a conserved set of differentially expressed genes. Expression profiling by microarray was performed on the plantaris muscle subjected to 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 14 days of hypertrophy or regrowth following 2 wk of hind-limb suspension. We identified 97 differentially expressed genes (≥2-fold increase or ≥50% decrease compared with control muscle) that were conserved during the two forms of muscle growth. The vast majority (∼90%) of the differentially expressed genes was upregulated and occurred at a single time point (64 out of 86 genes), which most often was on the first day of the time course. Microarray analysis from the conserved upregulated genes showed a set of genes related to contractile apparatus and stress response at day 1, including three genes involved in mechanotransduction and four genes encoding heat shock proteins. Our analysis further identified three cell cycle-related genes at day and several genes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) at both days 3 and 10. In conclusion, we have identified a core set of genes commonly upregulated in two forms of muscle growth that could play a role in the maintenance of sarcomere stability, ECM remodeling, cell proliferation, fast-to-slow fiber type transition, and the regulation of skeletal muscle growth. These findings suggest conserved regulatory mechanisms involved in the adaptation of skeletal muscle to increased mechanical loading.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>hind-limb suspension<n-term>mechanotransduction<n-term>stress response<n-term>transcriptome<n-term><newabs>26052708<newchar>To describe the progression of parenchymal remodeling and metalloproteinases gene expression in earlier stages of emphysema, mice received porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE) instillation and Control groups received saline solution. After PPE instillation (1, 3, 6 hours, 3 and 21 days) we measured the mean linear intercept, the volume proportion of types I and III collagen, elastin, fibrillin and the MMP-1, -8, -12 and -13 gene expression. We observed an initial decrease in type I (at the 3rd day) and type III collagen (from the 6th hour until the 3rd day), in posterior time points in which we detected increased gene expression for MMP-8 and -13 in PPE groups. After 21 days, the type III collagen fibers increased and the type I collagen values returned to similar values compared to control groups. The MMP-12 gene expression was increased in earlier times (3 and 6 hours) to which we detected a reduced proportion of elastin (3 days) in PPE groups, reinforcing the already established importance of MMP-12 in the breakdown of ECM. Such findings will be useful to better elucidate the alterations in ECM components and the importance of not only metalloelastase but also collagenases in earlier emphysema stages, providing new clues to novel therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>26091149<newchar>Tetraspanins are a superfamily of small transmembrane proteins that are expressed in almost all eukaryotic cells. Through interacting with one another and with other membrane and intracellular proteins, tetraspanins regulate a wide range of proteins such as integrins, cell surface receptors, and signaling molecules, and thereby engage in diverse cellular processes ranging from cell adhesion and migration to proliferation and differentiation. In particular, tetraspanins modulate the function of proteins involved in all determining factors of cell migration including cell-cell adhesion, cell-ECM adhesion, cytoskeletal protrusion/contraction, and proteolytic ECM remodeling. We herein provide a brief overview of collective in vitro and in vivo studies of tetraspanins to illustrate their regulatory functions in the migration and trafficking of cancer cells, vascular endothelial cells, skin cells (keratinocytes and fibroblasts), and leukocytes. We also discuss the involvement of tetraspanins in various pathologic and remedial processes that rely on cell migration and their potential value as targets for therapeutic intervention.<newchar>migration<n-term>small transmembrane proteins<n-term>tetraspanin<n-term>therapeutics<n-term><newabs>11070088<newchar>Myocardial fibrosis caused by maladaptive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is implicated in the dysfunction of the failing heart. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) regulate ECM remodeling, and are regulated by cytokines. Transgenic mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) (TNF1.6) develop heart failure. We hypothesized that modulation of TNF-alpha and/or MMP activity might alter the myocardial ECM remodeling process and the development of heart failure. To test this hypothesis, we took advantage of the TNF1.6 mice and studied soluble and total collagens and collagen type profiling by using hydroxyproline quantification, Sircol collagen assay, Northern blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry and studied myocardial function by using echocardiography. Progressive ventricular hypertrophy and dilation in the TNF1.6 mice were accompanied by a significant increase in MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity, an increase in collagen synthesis, deposition, and denaturation, and a decrease in undenatured collagens. In young TNF1.6 mice, these changes in the ECM were associated with marked diastolic dysfunction as demonstrated by significantly reduced transmitral Doppler echocardiographic E/A wave ratio. Anti-TNF-alpha treatment with adenoviral vector expressing soluble TNF-alpha receptor type I attenuated both MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity, prevented further collagen synthesis, deposition and denaturation, and preserved myocardial diastolic function in young, but not old, TNF1.6 mice. The results suggest a critical role of TNF-alpha and MMPs in myocardial matrix remodeling and functional regulation and support the hypothesis that both TNF-alpha and MMPs may serve as potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of heart failure.<newchar><newabs>26631222<newchar>Collagen is a major component in a wide range of drug delivery systems and biomaterial applications. Its basic physical and structural properties, together with its low immunogenicity and natural turnover, are keys to its biocompatibility and effectiveness. In addition to its material properties, the collagen triple-helix interacts with a large number of molecules that trigger biological events. Collagen interactions with cell surface receptors regulate many cellular processes, while interactions with other ECM components are critical for matrix structure and remodeling. Collagen also interacts with enzymes involved in its biosynthesis and degradation, including matrix metalloproteinases. Over the past decade, much information has been gained about the nature and specificity of collagen interactions with its partners. These studies have defined collagen sequences responsible for binding and the high-resolution structures of triple-helical peptides bound to its natural binding partners. Strategies to target collagen interactions are already being developed, including the use of monoclonal antibodies to interfere with collagen fibril formation and the use of triple-helical peptides to direct liposomes to melanoma cells. The molecular information about collagen interactions will further serve as a foundation for computational studies to design small molecules that can interfere with specific interactions or target tumor cells. Intelligent control of collagen biological interactions within a material context will expand the effectiveness of collagen-based drug delivery.<newchar>Collagen<n-term>Drug delivery<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Interaction<n-term>Peptide<n-term>Recombinant collagen<n-term>Targeting<n-term>Triple helix<n-term><newabs>26199463<newchar>Importance of chronic fibroproliferative diseases (FDs) including pulmonary fibrosis, chronic kidney diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, and cardiovascular or liver fibrosis is rapidly increasing and they have become a major public health problem. According to some estimates about 45% of all deaths are attributed to FDs in the developed world. Independently of their etiology the common hallmark of FDs is chronic inflammation. Infiltrating immune cells, endothelial, epithelial, and other resident cells of the injured organ release an orchestra of inflammatory mediators, which stimulate the proliferation and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) production of myofibroblasts, the effector cells of organ fibrosis. Abnormal amount of ECM disturbs the original organ architecture leading to the decline of function. Although our knowledge is rapidly expanding, we still have neither a diagnostic tool to detect nor a drug to specifically target fibrosis. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the more comprehensive understanding of the pathomechanism of fibrosis and development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. In the present review we provide an overview of the common key mediators of organ fibrosis highlighting the role of interleukin-10 (IL-10) cytokine family members (IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26), which recently came into focus as tissue remodeling-related inflammatory cytokines.<newchar><newabs>20581102<newchar>A decrease in vascular elasticity and an increase in pulse wave velocity in hyperhomocysteinemic (HHcy) cystathionine-beta-synthase heterozygote knockout (CBS(-/+)) mice has been observed. Nitric oxide (NO) is a potential regulator of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in MMP-NO-tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) inhibitory tertiary complex. However, the contribution of the nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms eNOS and iNOS in the activation of latent MMP is unclear. We hypothesize that the differential production of NO contributes to oxidative stress and increased oxidative/nitrative activation of MMP, resulting in vascular remodeling in response to HHcy. The overall goal is to elucidate the contribution of the NOS isoforms, endothelial and inducible, in the collagen/elastin switch. Experiments were performed on six groups of animals [wild-type (WT), eNOS(-/-), and iNOS(-/-) with and without homocysteine (Hcy) treatment (0.67 g/l) for 8-12 wk]. In vivo echograph was performed to assess aortic timed flow velocity for indirect compliance measurement. Histological determination of collagen and elastin with trichrome and van Gieson stains, respectively, was performed. In situ measurement of superoxide generation using dihydroethidium was used. Differential expression of eNOS, iNOS, nitrotyrosine, MMP-2 and -9, and elastin were measured by quantitative PCR and Western blot analyses. The 2% gelatin zymography was used to assess MMP activity. The increase in O(2)(-) and robust activity of MMP-9 in eNOS(-/-), WT+Hcy, and eNOS(-/-)+Hcy was accompanied by the gross disorganization and thickening of the ECM along with extensive collagen deposition and elastin degradation (collagen/elastin switch) resulting in a decrease in aortic timed flow velocity. Results show that an increase in iNOS activity is a key contributor to HHcy-mediated collagen/elastin switch and resulting decline in aortic compliance.<newchar><newabs>24021759<newchar>A wide variety of hydrogels have been explored as 3D culture platforms and for applications in tissue engineering. Hydrogels formed from natural extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins readily support the formation of vasculature in vitro, but only a handful of hydrogels composed of synthetic materials have shown anything comparable. This relative lack of synthetic material options has hindered efforts to better understand how ECM cues direct vascularization. We developed a biosynthetic hydrogel consisting of polyethylene glycol diacrylamide conjugated to macromolecular type-I collagen. Through their acrylamide-based crosslinks, these materials allow for independent control of physical properties and bulk ligand concentration. These hydrogels exhibited hydrolytic stability, but the collagen component retained its susceptibility to enzymatic remodeling. Photoencapsulation of endothelial cells and fibroblasts within this hydrogel material and their subsequent co-culture led to the formation of capillary vessel-like networks with well-defined hollow lumens. Capillary formation was prevented by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, recapitulating the MMP-dependence of vascularization observed in natural hydrogels. These findings validate the utility of this material platform to decipher how the ECM regulates capillary morphogenesis and to support the formation of vascularized tissue constructs for potential applications in regenerative medicine.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>Collagen<n-term>Endothelial cell<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Photopolymerization<n-term>Polyethylene oxide<n-term><newabs>21351054<newchar>Human cartilage is a complex tissue of matrix proteins that vary in amount and orientation from superficial to deep layers and from loaded to unloaded zones. A major challenge to efforts to repair cartilage by stem cell-based and other tissue engineering strategies is the inability of the resident chondrocytes to lay down new matrix with the same structural and resilient properties that it had upon its original formation. This is particularly true of the collagen network, which is susceptible to cleavage once proteoglycans are depleted. Thus, a thorough understanding of the similarities and particularly the marked differences in mechanisms of cartilage remodeling during development, osteoarthritis, and aging may lead to more effective strategies for preventing cartilage damage and promoting repair. To identify and characterize effectors or regulators of cartilage remodeling in these processes, we are using culture models of primary human and mouse chondrocytes and cell lines and mouse genetic models to manipulate gene expression programs leading to matrix remodeling and subsequent chondrocyte hypertrophic differentiation, pivotal processes which both go astray in OA disease. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-13, the major type II collagen-degrading collagenase, is regulated by stress-, inflammation-, and differentiation-induced signals that not only contribute to irreversible joint damage (progression) in OA, but importantly, also to the initiation/onset phase, wherein chondrocytes in articular cartilage leave their natural growth- and differentiation-arrested state. Our work points to common mediators of these processes in human OA cartilage and in early through late stages of OA in surgical and genetic mouse models.<newchar><newabs>27272641<newchar>Shorter axial length observed in patients with primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) might be due to altered matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) activity resulting in ECM remodeling during eye growth and development. This study aimed to evaluate common variants in MMP9 for association with PACG. Six tag SNPs of MMP9 were genotyped in a Chinese sample of 1,030 cases, including 572 PACG and 458 primary angle closure (PAC), and 499 controls. None of 6 SNPs were significantly associated with overall PAC/PACG (P &gt; 0.07) or with PAC/PACG subgroups (Pc &gt; 0.18). Meta-analysis of two non-Chinese studies revealed significant association between rs17576 and PACG (ORs = 0.56, P &lt; 0.0001); however, meta-analysis of our dataset with 4 Chinese datasets did not replicate this association (ORs = 1.23, P = 0.29). Prior significant association for rs3918249 in one Caucasian study (OR = 0.63, P = 0.006) was not replicated in meta-analysis of 3 Chinese studies including this study (ORs = 0.91, P = 0.13). Significant heterogeneity between non-Chinese and Chinese datasets precluded overall meta-analysis for rs17576 and rs3918249 (Q = 0.001 and 0.04 respectively). rs17577 was nominally associated with PACG in one Caucasian study (OR = 1.71, P = 0.02), but not in 3 Chinese studies including our study (ORs = 1.20, P = 0.07). Overall meta-analysis revealed nominal association for rs17577 and PAC/PACG (ORs = 1.26, Pc = 0.05). Meta-analysis did not show significant association between the other SNPs and PAC/PACG (P &gt; 0.47). The largest association study to date did not find significant association between MMP9 and PAC/PACG in Chinese; meta-analysis with other Chinese datasets did not produce significant association. In most instances combination with non-Chinese datasets was not possible except for one variant showing nominally significant association. More work is needed to define the role of MMP9 variants in PACG.<newchar><newabs>24105737<newchar>Cancer progression is characterized by extensive tumor invasion into the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) and migration to metastatic sites. The increased proteolytic degradation of the ECM during tumor invasion is directly dependent on the activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), counter-balanced by tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). In this study, we found that unbalanced expression of MMP/TIMP axis genes in tumors was correlated with aberrant epigenotypes in the various gene promoters. The malignant epigenotypes could be therapeutically corrected by a simple defined factor-mediated reprogramming approach. Correction of the abnormal epigenotypes by nuclear remodeling leads to a rebalance in the gene expression profile, an alteration in tumor cell morphology, attenuation of tumor cell migration and invasion in vitro, and reduced tumorigenicity in nude mice. We further identified the downregulation of the MKK-p38 MAPK signal pathway as an important underlying mechanism for reduced tumorigenicity in this epigenetic reprogramming model. These data demonstrate that the malignant phenotypes seen in cancer can be corrected by a nuclear remodeling mechanism, thus highlighting a novel non-chemotherapeutic, non-radiotherapeutic approach for the treatment of cancer.<newchar>DNA methylation<n-term>MAPK signal pathway<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>cancer<n-term>cell reprogramming<n-term>epigenetics<n-term>epigenotype<n-term>histone modification<n-term>matrix<n-term>metalloproteinases<n-term><newabs>25512788<newchar>Chronic hyperglycemia is one of the main characteristics of diabetes. Persistent exposure to elevated glucose levels has been recognized as one of the major causal factors of diabetic complications. In pathologies, like type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), mechanical and biochemical stimuli activate profibrotic signaling cascades resulting in myocardial fibrosis and subsequent impaired cardiac performance due to ventricular stiffness. High levels of glucose nonenzymatically react with long-lived proteins, such as collagen, to form advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGE-modified collagen increase matrix stiffness making it resistant to hydrolytic turnover, resulting in an accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. AGEs account for many of the diabetic cardiovascular complications through their engagement of the receptor for AGE (RAGE). AGE/RAGE activation stimulates the secretion of numerous profibrotic growth factors, promotes increased collagen deposition leading to tissue fibrosis, as well as increased RAGE expression. To date, the AGE/RAGE cascade is not fully understood. In this review, we will discuss one of the major fibrotic signaling pathways, the AGE/RAGE signaling cascade, as well as propose an alternate pathway via Rap1a that may offer insight into cardiovascular ECM remodeling in T2DM. In a series of studies, we demonstrate a role for Rap1a in the regulation of fibrosis and myofibroblast differentiation in isolated diabetic and non-diabetic fibroblasts. While these studies are still in a preliminary stage, inhibiting Rap1a protein expression appears to down-regulate the molecular switch used to activate the ζ isotype of protein kinase C thereby promote AGE/RAGE-mediated fibrosis.<newchar>Advanced glycation end product<n-term>Cardiac fibrosis<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibroblasts<n-term>Rap1a<n-term>Type 2 diabetes mellitus<n-term><newabs>25553420<newchar>Vascular aging is associated with structural and functional modifications of the arteries, and by an increase in arterial wall thickening in the intima and the media, mainly resulting from structural modifications of the extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Among the factors known to accumulate with aging, advanced lipid peroxidation end products (ALEs) are a hallmark of oxidative stress-associated diseases such as atherosclerosis. Aldehydes generated from the peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), (4-hydroxynonenal, malondialdehyde, acrolein), form adducts on cellular proteins, leading to a progressive protein dysfunction with consequences in the pathophysiology of vascular aging. The contribution of these aldehydes to ECM modification is not known. This study was carried out to investigate whether aldehyde-adducts are detected in the intima and media in human aorta, whether their level is increased in vascular aging, and whether elastin fibers are a target of aldehyde-adduct formation. Immunohistological and confocal immunofluorescence studies indicate that 4-HNE-histidine-adducts accumulate in an age-related manner in the intima, media and adventitia layers of human aortas, and are mainly expressed in smooth muscle cells. In contrast, even if the structure of elastin fiber is strongly altered in the aged vessels, our results show that elastin is not or very poorly modified by 4-HNE. These data indicate a complex role for lipid peroxidation and in particular for 4-HNE in elastin homeostasis, in the vascular wall remodeling during aging and atherosclerosis development.<newchar>4-hydroxynonenal<n-term>Aging<n-term>Atherosclerosis<n-term>Elastin<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Smooth muscle cells<n-term><newabs>21793226<newchar>Neural cells secrete diverse molecules, which accumulate in the extracellular space and form the extracellular matrix (ECM). Interactions between cells and the ECM are well recognized to play the crucial role in cell migration and guidance of growing axons, whereas formation of mature neural ECM in the form of perineuronal nets is believed to restrict certain forms of developmental plasticity. On the other hand, major components of perineuronal nets and other ECM molecules support induction of functional plasticity, the most studied form of which is long-term potentiation. Here, we review the underlying mechanisms by which ECM molecules, their receptors and remodeling proteases regulate the induction and maintenance of synaptic modifications. In particular, we highlight that activity-dependent secretion and activation of proteases leads to a local cleavage of the ECM and release of signaling proteolytic fragments. These molecules regulate transmitter receptor trafficking, actin cytoskeleton, growth of dendritic spines, and formation of dendritic filopodia.<newchar><newabs>24720435<newchar>The physiological role of the actin cytoskeleton is well known: it provides mechanical support and endogenous force generation for formation of a cell shape and for migration. Furthermore, a growing number of studies have demonstrated another significant role of the actin cytoskeleton: it offers dynamic epigenetic memory for guiding cell fate, in particular, proliferation and differentiation. Because instantaneous imbalance in the mechanical homeostasis is adjusted through actin remodeling, a synthetic extracellular matrix (ECM) niche as a source of topographical and mechanical cues is expected to be effective at modulation of the actin cytoskeleton. In this context, the synthetic ECM niche determines cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation, all of which have to be controlled in functional tissue engineering scaffolds to ensure proper regulation of tissue/organ formation, maintenance of tissue integrity and repair, and regeneration. Here, with an emphasis on the epigenetic role of the actin cytoskeletal system, we propose a design concept of micro/nanotopography of a tissue engineering scaffold for control of cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation in a stable and well-defined manner, both in vitro and in vivo.<newchar><newabs>25261607<newchar>Since their inaugural discovery in the early 1960s, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been shown to mediate multiple physiological and pathological processes. In addition to their canonical function in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, research in the last decade has highlighted new MMP functions, including proteolysis of novel substrates beyond ECM proteins, MMP localization to subcellular organelles, and proteolysis of susceptible intracellular proteins in those subcellular compartments. This review will provide a comparison of the extracellular and intracellular roles of MMPs, illustrating that MMPs are far more interesting than the one-dimensional view originally taken. We focus on the roles of MMP-2 in cardiac injury and repair, as this is one of the most studied MMPs in the cardiovascular field. We will highlight how understanding all dimensions, such as localization of activity and timing of interventions, will increase the translational potential of research findings. Building upon old ideas and turning them inside out and upside down will help us to better understand how to move the MMP field forward.<newchar>Cardiovascular disease<n-term>Doxycycline<n-term>Heart failure<n-term>MMP-2<n-term>Myocardial ischemia and infarction<n-term>TIPTOP<n-term><newabs>26774137<newchar>Endosialin, alternatively named tumor endothelial marker 1 (TEM1) or CD248, is a bulk transmembrane glycoprotein expressed both in developing and adult tissues undergoing active physiological or pathological angiogenesis. Endosialin is often overexpressed in tumors, particularly in stromal cells and in vessels-covering pericytes, and its transcription is induced by hypoxia via HIF-2 transcription factor. Based on the expression pattern, molecular characteristics and phenotypes of genetic models, endosialin has been proposed to function as a receptor implicated in sprouting angiogenesis, vasculogenesis and/or pruning of vessels. Here we provide an overview of the recent knowledge linking endosialin to diverse aspects of angiogenesis. Based on data-mining, our experimental data and available literature, we suggest that endosialin cross-talks with both pro- and anti-angiogenic signals and ECM components, and participates in dynamic vascular remodeling, which facilitates tumor growth. Tumor-selective targeting of endosialin may therefore contribute to improvement of existing anti-angiogenic therapies.<newchar>angiogenesis<n-term>cancer.<n-term>endosialin<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>pericytes<n-term><newabs>26675403<newchar>In response to injury, reparative processes are triggered to restore the damaged tissue; however, such processes are not always successful in rebuilding the original state. The formation of fibrous connective tissue is known as fibrosis, a hallmark of the reparative process. For fibrosis to be successful, delicately balanced cellular events involving cell proliferation, cell migration, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling must occur in a highly orchestrated manner. While successful repair may result in a fibrous scar, this often restores structural stability and functionality to the injured tissue. However, depending on the functionality of the injured tissue, a fibrotic scar can have a devastating effect. For example, in the retina, fibrotic scarring may compromise vision and ultimately lead to blindness. In this review, we discuss some of the retinal fibrotic complications and highlight mechanisms underlying the development of retinal fibrosis in diabetic retinopathy.<newchar>Diabetic retinopathy<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Müller cell<n-term>Retinal fibrosis<n-term>Vascular endothelial growth factor<n-term><newabs>26771601<newchar>Limited comprehension of aneurysm pathology has led to inconclusive results from clinical trials. miRNAs are key regulators of post-translational gene modification and are useful tools in elucidating key features of aneurysm pathogenesis in distinct entities of abdominal and popliteal aneurysms. Here, surgically harvested specimens from 19 abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and 8 popliteal artery aneurysm (PAA) patients were analyzed for miRNA expression and histologically classified regarding extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and inflammation. DIANA-based computational target prediction and pathway enrichment analysis verified our results, as well as previous ones. miRNA-362, -19b-1, -194, -769, -21 and -550 were significantly down-regulated in AAA samples depending on degree of inflammation. Similar or inverse regulation was found for miR-769, 19b-1 and miR-550, -21, whereas miR-194 and -362 were unaltered in PAA. In situ hybridization verified higher expression of miR-550 and -21 in PAA compared to AAA and computational analysis for target genes and pathway enrichment affirmed signal transduction, cell-cell-interaction and cell degradation pathways, in line with previous results. Despite the vague role of miRNAs for potential diagnostic and treatment purposes, the number of candidates from tissue signature studies is increasing. Tissue morphology influences subsequent research, yet comparison of distinct entities of aneurysm disease can unravel core pathways.<newchar>AAA<n-term>histologic diversity<n-term>miRNA expression<n-term>pathway analysis<n-term>popliteal aneurysm<n-term><newabs>24184030<newchar>TGFβ2 induces extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and alters the cytoskeleton by both the canonical Smad and non-canonical signaling pathways. TGFβ2 regulates the expression of ECM proteins in trabecular meshwork (TM) cells, increases intraocular pressure (IOP) in an ex vivo perfusion organ culture model, and induces ocular hypertension in rodent eyes. A necessary step in the canonical Smad signaling pathway is phosphorylation of receptor protein Smad3 by the TGF-β receptor complex. The purpose of this study was to determine whether TGFβ2 signals in vivo through the canonical Smad signaling pathway in the TM using Smad3 knockout (KO) mice. Ad5.hTGFβ2(226/228) (2.5 × 10(7) pfu) was injected intravitreally into one eye of homozygous (WT), heterozygous (HET), and homozygous (KO) 129-Smad3(tm1Par)/J mice (n = 9-10 mice/group), with the uninjected contralateral eye serving as the control. IOP measurements were taken using a rebound tonometer. To test the effect of TGFβ2 signaling on the ECM, fibronectin expression was determined by immunohistochemistry and qPCR analysis. Transduction of the TM with viral vector Ad5.hTGFβ2(226/228) caused a statistically significant difference in IOP exposure between Smad3 genotypes: WT, 187.7 ± 23.9 mmHg*day (n = 9); HET, 95.6 ± 24.5 mmHg*day (n = 9); KO, 52.8 ± 25.2 mmHg*day (n = 10); (p &lt; 0.05 WT versus HET, p &lt; 0.01 WT versus KO). Immunohistochemistry and qPCR analysis showed that Ad5.hTGFβ2(226/228) increased fibronectin expression in the TM of WT mice (2.23 ± 0.24 fold) compared to Smad3 KO mice (0.99 ± 0.19 fold), p &lt; 0.05. These results demonstrate Smad3 is a necessary signaling protein for TGFβ2-induced ocular hypertension and fibronectin deposition in the TM.<newchar>TGFβ2 signaling<n-term>glaucoma<n-term>mouse model<n-term>ocular hypertension<n-term>trabecular meshwork<n-term><newabs>18291634<newchar>Fibrosis is believed to occur through the failure to terminate the normal tissue remodeling program. Tissue repair intimately involves the ability of fibroblasts to attach to extracellular matrix (ECM), resulting in cell migration and ECM contraction. Elevated, activated adhesive signaling is a key phenotypic hallmark of fibrotic cells. The precise contribution of adhesion to tissue remodeling and repair and fibrotic responses in fibroblasts is unclear, but involves focal adhesion kinase (FAK). FAK signals downstream of integrin-mediates attachment of fibroblasts to extracellular matrix. In this report, we show that FAK is required for the expression of a cohort of mRNAs encoding ECM and matrix remodeling genes including CCN2, alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) and type I collagen. Adhesion of fibroblasts to fibronectin, a component of the provisional matrix deposited in the initial phases of tissue repair, also resulted in the induction of CCN2, alpha-SMA and type I collagen mRNAs. Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a key inducer of pro-fibrotic gene expression, was also induced upon fibroblast attachment to ECM, and antagonism of the ET-1 receptors significantly reduced the ability of adhesion to induce expression of CCN2, alpha-SMA and type I collagen mRNAs. These results suggest that adhesion of fibroblasts to matrix during the initial phases of tissue remodeling and repair may actively contribute to the tissue repair program through the induction of pro-fibrotic gene expression.<newchar><newabs>26702558<newchar>We followed the progression of healing of deep excisional biopsy punch wounds over the course of 365 days in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) by monitoring visual wound healing and gene expression in the healing muscle at regular intervals (1, 3, 7, 14, 38 and 100 days post-wounding). In addition, we performed muscle texture analysis one year after wound infliction. The selected genes have all previously been investigated in relation to vertebrate wound healing, but only few specifically in fish. The selected genes were interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 and -β3, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) -9 and -13, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), fibronectin (FN), tenascin-C (TN-C), prolyl 4-hydroxylase α1-chain (P4Hα1), lysyl oxidase (LOX), collagen type I α1-chain (ColIα1), CD41 and CD163. Wound healing progressed slowly in the presented study, which is at least partially due to the low temperature of about 8.5 °C during the first 100 days. The inflammation phase lasted more than 14 days, and the genes relating to production and remodeling of new extracellular matrix (ECM) exhibited a delayed but prolonged upregulation starting 1-2 weeks post-wounding and lasting until at least 100 days post-wounding. The gene expression patterns and histology reveal limited capacity for muscle regeneration in rainbow trout, and muscle texture analyses one year after wound infliction confirm that wounds heal with fibrosis. At 100 dpw epidermis had fully regenerated, and dermis partially regenerated. Scales had not regenerated even after one year. CD163 is a marker of &quot;wound healing&quot;-type M2c macrophages in mammals. M2 macrophage markers are as yet poorly described in fish. The pattern of CD163 expression in the present study is consistent with the expected timing of presence of M2c macrophages in the wound. CD163 may thus potentially prove a valuable marker of M2 macrophages - or a subset hereof - in fish. We subjected a group of fish to bathing in an immunomodulatory β-glucan product during wound healing, but found this to have very limited effect on wound healing in contrast to a previously published study on common carp.<newchar>Beta-glucan<n-term>CD163<n-term>Gene expression<n-term>Image analysis<n-term>Macrophage<n-term>Muscle<n-term>Oncorhynchus mykiss<n-term>Rainbow trout<n-term>Teleost<n-term>Texture<n-term>Wound healing<n-term><newabs>24069595<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative disease that affects various tissues surrounding joints such as articular cartilage, subchondral bone, synovial membrane, and ligaments. No therapy is currently available to completely prevent the initiation or progression of the disease partly due to poor understanding of the mechanisms of the disease pathology. Cartilage is the main tissue afflicted by OA, and chondrocytes, the sole cellular component in the tissue, actively participate in the degeneration process. Multiple factors affect the development and progression of OA including inflammation that is sustained during the progression of the disease and alteration in biomechanical conditions due to wear and tear or trauma in cartilage. During the progression of OA, extracellular matrix (ECM) of cartilage is actively remodeled by chondrocytes under inflammatory conditions. This alteration of ECM, in turn, changes the biomechanical environment of chondrocytes, which further drives the progression of the disease in the presence of inflammation. The changes in ECM composition and structure also prevent participation of mesenchymal stem cells in the repair process by inhibiting their chondrogenic differentiation. This review focuses on how inflammation-induced ECM remodeling disturbs cellular activities to prevent self-regeneration of cartilage in the pathology of OA.<newchar><newabs>25973294<newchar>Podoplanin overexpression has been reported in various cancers, however, the precise mechanism for podoplanin to promote tumor progression remains elusive. In the present study, podoplanin overexpression was found associated with invasiveness both in OSCC tissues and cell lines. Moreover, the cell invasiveness increased with forced podoplanin expression and decreased when podoplanin was knockdown, indicating podoplanin-mediated cell invasion during OSCC progression. To further identify the role of podoplanin in tumor invasion, cell spreading and immunofluorescence assay were performed firstly. It was found that podoplanin knockdown caused an impaired cell spreading with reduced filopodia and the premature assembly of stress fibers while podoplanin overexpression induced an increase in cellular protrusions and stress fibers with extensive parallel bundles. Then, pull-down assays revealed forced podoplanin expression increased Cdc42 activity and reduced RhoA activity while podoplanin knockdown decreased Cdc42 and increased RhoA markedly. Moreover, a hierarchy of crosstalk between RhoA and Cdc42 was confirmed in podoplanin-mediated cell motility. On the other hand, a significant correlation between podoplanin and MT1-MMP expression in OSCCs was found both in vivo and in vitro, co-located in invasive cells and cellular protrusions. Furthermore, our data showed MT1-MMP knockdown significantly blocked the upregulation of cell motility by forced podoplanin expression, indicating that MT1-MMP played a role in podoplanin-mediated tumor invasion. To further confirm the interaction between RhoA/Cdc42 complex, MT1-MMP and podoplanin, co-precipitation experiments were performed. Both the co-precipitation of podoplanin with MT1-MMP and the podoplanin-induced specific binding of MT1-MMP to Cdc42 were found, and immunofluorescence revealed the co-location of podoplanin, MT1-MMP and Cdc42 at the plasma membrane and filopodia induced an increase in cellular protrusion and stress fibers formation. Moreover, MT1-MMP inhibition could partly rescue the increase of Cdc42 activity caused by forced podoplanin expression. Taken together, our data demonstrated a hierarchy of crosstalk between RhoA and Cdc42 was involved in podoplanin-mediated cytoskeleton remodeling and invasion; the co-location and co-ordination of podoplanin, Cdc42 and MT1-MMP in the invadopodia might induce cytoskeleton remodeling, ECM degradation and tumor invasion, while podoplanin-induced EMT may not be indispensible during OSCC progression.<newchar>Cdc42/RhoA<n-term>MT1-MMP<n-term>Podoplanin<n-term>invasion<n-term>oral squamous cell carcinoma<n-term><newabs>24285264<newchar>Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a common and serious complication of premature birth, characterized by a pronounced arrest of alveolar development. The underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are poorly understood although perturbations to the maturation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are emerging as candidate disease pathomechanisms. In this study, the expression and regulation of three members of the lysyl hydroxylase family of ECM remodeling enzymes (Plod1, Plod2, and Plod3) in clinical BPD, as well as in an experimental animal model of BPD, were addressed. All three enzymes were localized to the septal walls in developing mouse lungs, with Plod1 also expressed in the vessel walls of the developing lung and Plod3 expressed uniquely at the base of developing septa. The expression of plod1, plod2, and plod3 was upregulated in the lungs of mouse pups exposed to 85% O2, an experimental animal model of BPD. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β increased plod2 mRNA levels and activated the plod2 promoter in vitro in lung epithelial cells and in lung fibroblasts. Using in vivo neutralization of TGF-β signaling in the experimental animal model of BPD, TGF-β was identified as the regulator of aberrant plod2 expression. PLOD2 mRNA expression was also elevated in human neonates who died with BPD or at risk for BPD, compared with neonates matched for gestational age at birth or chronological age at death. These data point to potential roles for lysyl hydroxylases in normal lung development, as well as in perturbed late lung development associated with BPD.<newchar>bronchopulmonary dysplasia<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>lung development<n-term>lysyl hydroxylase<n-term><newabs>26590090<newchar>Periampullary adenocarcinomas can be of two histological subtypes, intestinal or pancreatobiliary. The latter is more frequent and aggressive, and characterized by a prominent desmoplastic stroma, which is tightly related to the biology of the cancer, including its poor response to chemotherapy. Whereas miRNAs are known to regulate various cellular processes and interactions between cells, their exact role in periampullary carcinoma remains to be characterized, especially with respect to the prominent stromal component of pancreatobiliary type cancers. The present study aimed at elucidating this role by miRNA expression profiling of the carcinomatous and stromal component in twenty periampullary adenocarcinomas of pancreatobiliary type. miRNA expression profiles were compared between carcinoma cells, stromal cells and normal tissue samples. A total of 43 miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed between carcinoma and stroma of which 11 belong to three miRNA families (miR-17, miR-15 and miR-515). The levels of expression of miRNAs miR-17, miR-20a, miR-20b, miR-223, miR-10b, miR-2964a and miR-342 were observed to be higher and miR-519e to be lower in the stromal component compared to the carcinomatous and normal components. They follow a trend where expression in stroma is highest followed by carcinoma and then normal tissue. Pathway analysis revealed that pathways regulating tumor-stroma interactions such as ECM interaction remodeling, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, focal adhesion pathway, TGF-beta, MAPK signaling, axon guidance and endocytosis were differently regulated. The miRNA-mRNA mediated interactions between carcinoma and stromal cells add new knowledge regarding tumor-stroma interactions.<newchar>Bioinformatics and statistical analyses<n-term>Pathway analysis<n-term>Periampullary adenocarcinoma<n-term>Stromal reaction<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term>Tumor-stroma interaction<n-term>miRNA/mRNA expression profiling<n-term><newabs>25604905<newchar>Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) frequently develops in a pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic environment with hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) remodeling the extracellular matrix composition. Molecules secreted by liver tumors contributing to HSC activation and peritumoral stromal transformation remain to be fully identified. Here we show that conditioned medium from HCC cell lines, Hep3B and HepG2, induced primary mouse HSCs transdifferentiation, characterized by profibrotic properties and collagen modification, with similar results seen in the human HSC cell line LX2. Moreover, tumor growth was enhanced by coinjection of HepG2/LX2 cells in a xenograft murine model, supporting a HCC-HSC crosstalk in liver tumor progression. Protein microarray secretome analyses revealed angiogenin as the most robust and selective protein released by HCC compared to LX2 secreted molecules. In fact, recombinant angiogenin induced in vitro HSC activation requiring its nuclear translocation and rRNA transcriptional stimulation. Moreover, angiogenin antagonism by blocking antibodies or angiogenin inhibitor neomycin decreased in vitro HSC activation by conditioned media or recombinant angiogenin. Finally, neomycin administration reduced tumor growth of HepG2-LX2 cells coinjected in mice. In conclusion, angiogenin secretion by HCCs favors tumor development by inducing HSC activation and ECM remodeling. These findings indicate that targeting angiogenin signaling may be of potential relevance in HCC management.<newchar><newabs>24334146<newchar>Cells adapt in response to mechanical stimulation to ensure adequate tissue functioning. F-actin stress fibers provide a key element in the adaptation process. The high sensitivity and fast adaptation of the F-actin cytoskeleton to cyclic strain have been studied extensively in a 2-D environment; however, 3-D data are scarce. Our previous work showed that stress fibers organize perpendicular to cyclic stretching (stretch-avoidance) in three dimensions. However, stretch-avoidance was absent when cells populated a high density matrix. In this study our aim was to obtain more insight into the synergy between matrix density and the signaling pathways that govern stress fiber remodeling. Therefore we studied stress fiber organization in 3-D reconstituted collagen tissues (at low and high matrix density), subjected to cyclic stretch upon interference with molecular signaling pathways. In particular, the influence of the small GTPase Rho and its downstream effectors were studied. Only at low matrix density does stress fiber stretch avoidance show a stretch-magnitude-dependent response. The activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), Rho-kinase and myosin light chain kinase are essential for stress fiber reorientation. Although high matrix density restricts stress fiber reorientation, Rho activation can overcome this restriction, but only in the presence of active MMPs. Results from this study highlight a synergistic action between matrix remodeling and Rho signaling in cyclic-stretch-induced stress fiber organization in 3-D tissue.<newchar>Collagen<n-term>ECM<n-term>Rho-signaling<n-term>Stress fibers<n-term>Stretch-avoidance<n-term><newabs>26735172<newchar>Epidermal Growth Factor-like repeats and Discoidin I-Like Domains 3 (EDIL3), an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein associated with vascular morphogenesis and remodeling, is commonly upregulated in multiple types of human cancers and correlates with tumor progression. However, its expression pattern and underlying cellular functions in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remain largely unexplored. In current study, we observed that expression of EDIL3 was significantly up-regulated in PDAC compared with normal controls in both cell lines and clinical specimens. In addition, elevated EDIL3 expression was positively correlated with patients' TNM stage and T classification. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that high EDIL3 expression was significantly associated with shorter overall survival times in PDAC patients. Multivariate Cox regression analysis confirmed EDIL3 expression, age, lymph node metastasis and histological differentiation as independent prognostic factors in PDAC. Knockdown of EDIL3 showed no significant influence on cell viability, migration, invasion and starvation-induced apoptosis, but compromised anoikis resistance and anchorage independent tumor growth of PDAC cells. Meanwhile, treatment with recombinant EDIL3 protein markedly promoted anoikis resistance and anchorage independent tumor growth. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that altered protein expression of Bcl-2 family might contribute to the oncogenic activities of EDIL3. In conclusion, this study provides evidences that EDIL3 is a potential predictor and plays an important role in anchorage independent tumor growth of PDAC and EDIL3-related pathways might represent a novel therapeutic strategy for treatment of pancreatic cancer.<newchar>EDIL3<n-term>anoikis<n-term>pancreatic cancer<n-term>prognosis<n-term>tumor growth<n-term><newabs>24441831<newchar>Angiogenesis is the process by which new blood vessels sprout from existing blood vessels, enabling new vascular elements to be added to an existing vasculature. This review discusses our investigations into the role of cell-matrix mechanics in the mechanical regulation of angiogenesis. The experimental aspects of the research are based on in vitro experiments using an organ culture model of sprouting angiogenesis with the goal of developing new treatments and techniques to either promote or inhibit angiogenic outgrowth, depending on the application. Computational simulations were performed to simulate angiogenic growth coupled to matrix deformation, and live two-photon microscopy was used to obtain insight into the dynamic mechanical interaction between angiogenic neovessels and the extracellular matrix. In these studies, we characterized how angiogenic neovessels remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) and how properties of the matrix such as density and boundary conditions influence vascular growth and alignment. Angiogenic neovessels extensively deform and remodel the matrix through a combination of applied traction, proteolytic activity, and generation of new cell-matrix adhesions. The angiogenic phenotype within endothelial cells is promoted by ECM deformation and remodeling. Sensitivity analysis using our finite element model of angiogenesis suggests that cell-generated traction during growth is the most important parameter controlling the deformation of the matrix and, therefore, angiogenic growth and remodeling. Live two-photon imaging has also revealed numerous neovessel behaviors during angiogenesis that are poorly understood such as episodic growth/regression, neovessel colocation, and anastomosis. Our research demonstrates that the topology of a resulting vascular network can be manipulated directly by modifying the mechanical interaction between angiogenic neovessels and the matrix.<newchar><newabs>23997174<newchar>Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by abnormal repair in the lung resulting in airway obstruction associated with emphysema and peripheral airway fibrosis. Because the presence and degree of airways disease and emphysema varies between COPD patients, this may explain the heterogeneity in the response to treatment. It is currently unknown whether and to what extent inhaled steroids can affect the abnormal repair process in the airways and lung parenchyma in COPD. We investigated the effects of fluticasone on transforming growth factor (TGF)-β- and cigarette smoke-induced changes in mothers against decapentaplegic homolog (Smad) signaling and extracellular matrix (ECM) production in airway and parenchymal lung fibroblasts from patients with severe COPD. We showed that TGF-β-induced ECM production by pulmonary fibroblasts, but not activation of the Smad pathway, was sensitive to the effects of fluticasone. Fluticasone induced decorin production by airway fibroblasts and partly reversed the negative effects of TGF-β treatment. Fluticasone inhibited biglycan production in both airway and parenchymal fibroblasts and procollagen 1 production only in parenchymal fibroblasts, thereby restoring the basal difference in procollagen 1 production between airway and parenchymal fibroblasts. Our findings suggest that the effects of steroids on the airway compartment may be beneficial for patients with severe COPD, i.e., restoration of decorin loss around the airways, whereas the effects of steroids on the parenchyma may be detrimental, since the tissue repair response, i.e., biglycan and procollagen production, is inhibited. More research is needed to further disentangle these differential effects of steroid treatment on the different lung compartments and its impact on tissue repair and remodeling in COPD.<newchar>chronic obstructive pulmonary disease<n-term>tissue repair and remodeling<n-term><newabs>15133493<newchar>Transforming growth factor (TGF) beta is a potent regulator of cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesions (collectively termed cellular adhesions). Cellular adhesions play crucial roles in controlling the differentiation of epithelial cells and in maintaining the integrity of the epithelium. Loss of TGF beta-responsiveness is thought to be an important early initiating event in the malignant progression of epithelial cancer. In the TGFbeta-responsive human colon adenocarcinoma Moser cells, TGFbeta promotes cellular adhesions and suppresses their malignant phenotype. TGFbeta promotes cell-matrix adhesion by inducing the synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules and the expression of integrin receptors for these molecules (termed ECM remodeling). TGFbeta promotes cell-cell adhesion through the induction of E-cadherin expression, an epithelial associated homotypic cell-cell adhesion molecule, which also functions as a tumor suppressor in colon cancer. How TGFbeta regulates E-cadherin expression is not known. In this study, we showed that the induction of E-cadherin by TGFbeta was mediated through the activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), a major signaling molecule in focal adhesion contacts and that the activation of FAK was due to ECM remodeling and increased cell-matrix interactions. Thus, TGFbeta regulates cell-cell adhesion through its ability to remodel the ECM and to activate FAK through ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>26819763<newchar>The perineuronal net (PN) is a subtype of extracellular matrix appearing as a net-like structure around distinct neurons throughout the whole CNS. PNs surround the soma, proximal dendrites, and the axonal initial segment embedding synaptic terminals on the neuronal surface. Different functions of the PNs are suggested which include support of synaptic stabilization, inhibition of axonal sprouting, and control of neuronal plasticity. A number of studies provide evidence that removing PNs or PN-components results in renewed neurite growth and synaptogenesis. In a mouse model for Purkinje cell degeneration, we examined the effect of deafferentation on synaptic remodeling and modulation of PNs in the deep cerebellar nuclei. We found reduced GABAergic, enhanced glutamatergic innervations at PN-associated neurons, and altered expression of the PN-components brevican and hapln4. These data refer to a direct interaction between ECM and synapses. The altered brevican expression induced by activated astrocytes could be required for an adequate regeneration by promoting neurite growth and synaptogenesis.<newchar><newabs>25267619<newchar>Biological materials exhibit complex nanotopology, i.e., a composite liquid and solid phase structure that is heterogeneous on the nanoscale. The diffusion of nanoparticles in nanotopological environments can elucidate biophysical changes associated with pathogenesis and disease progression. However, there is a lack of methods that characterize nanoprobe diffusion and translate easily to in vivo studies. Here, we demonstrate a method based on optical coherence tomography (OCT) to depth-resolve diffusion of plasmon-resonant gold nanorods (GNRs) that are weakly constrained by the biological tissue. By using GNRs that are on the size scale of the polymeric mesh, their Brownian motion is minimally hindered by intermittent collisions with local macromolecules. OCT depth-resolves the particle-averaged translational diffusion coefficient (DT) of GNRs within each coherence volume, which is separable from the nonequilibrium motile activities of cells based on the unique polarized light-scattering properties of GNRs. We show how this enables minimally invasive imaging and monitoring of nanotopological changes in a variety of biological models, including extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling as relevant to carcinogenesis, and dehydration of pulmonary mucus as relevant to cystic fibrosis. In 3D ECM models, DT of GNRs decreases with both increasing collagen concentration and cell density. Similarly, DT of GNRs is sensitive to human bronchial-epithelial mucus concentration over a physiologically relevant range. This novel method comprises a broad-based platform for studying heterogeneous nanotopology, as distinct from bulk viscoelasticity, in biological milieu.<newchar>diffusion in extracellular matrix<n-term>diffusion in mucus<n-term>dynamic light scattering<n-term>nanoparticle diffusion<n-term>plasmon resonance<n-term><newabs>10974004<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) stromelysin-3 (ST3) was originally discovered as a gene whose expression was associated with human breast cancer carcinomas and with apoptosis during organogenesis and tissue remodeling. It has been shown previously, in our studies as well as those by others, that ST3 mRNA is highly upregulated during apoptotic tissue remodeling during Xenopus laevis metamorphosis. Using a function-blocking antibody against the catalytic domain of Xenopus ST3, we demonstrate here that ST3 protein is specifically expressed in the cells adjacent to the remodeling extracellular matrix (ECM) that lies beneath the apoptotic larval intestinal epithelium in X. laevis in vivo, and during thyroid hormone-induced intestinal remodeling in organ cultures. More importantly, addition of this antibody, but not the preimmune antiserum or unrelated antibodies, to the medium of intestinal organ cultures leads to an inhibition of thyroid hormone-induced ECM remodeling, apoptosis of the larval epithelium, and the invasion of the adult intestinal primodia into the connective tissue, a process critical for adult epithelial morphogenesis. On the other hand, the antibody has little effect on adult epithelial cell proliferation. Furthermore, a known MMP inhibitor can also inhibit epithelial transformation in vitro. These results indicate that ST3 is required for cell fate determination and cell migration during morphogenesis, most likely through ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>25064116<newchar>Diabetes is a rapidly increasing disease that enhances the chances of heart failure twofold to fourfold (as compared to age and sex matched nondiabetics) and becomes a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. There are two broad classifications of diabetes: type1 diabetes (T1D) and type2 diabetes (T2D). Several mice models mimic both T1D and T2D in humans. However, the genetic intervention to ameliorate diabetic cardiomyopathy in these mice often requires creating double knockout (DKO). In order to assess the therapeutic potential of a gene, that specific gene is either overexpressed (transgenic expression) or abrogated (knockout) in the diabetic mice. If the genetic mice model for diabetes is used, it is necessary to create DKO with transgenic/knockout of the target gene to investigate the specific role of that gene in pathological cardiac remodeling in diabetics. One of the important genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in diabetes is matrix metalloproteinase-9 (Mmp9). Mmp9 is a collagenase that remains latent in healthy hearts but induced in diabetic hearts. Activated Mmp9 degrades extracellular matrix (ECM) and increases matrix turnover causing cardiac fibrosis that leads to heart failure. Insulin2 mutant (Ins2+/-) Akita is a genetic model for T1D that becomes diabetic spontaneously at the age of 3-4 weeks and show robust hyperglycemia at the age of 10-12 weeks. It is a chronic model of T1D. In Ins2+/- Akita, Mmp9 is induced. To investigate the specific role of Mmp9 in diabetic hearts, it is necessary to create diabetic mice where Mmp9 gene is deleted. Here, we describe the method to generate Ins2+/-/Mmp9-/- (DKO) mice to determine whether the abrogation of Mmp9 ameliorates diabetic cardiomyopathy.<newchar><newabs>22734649<newchar>Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), an important cytokine with multiple functions, is secreted during wound healing. Previous studies have utilized two-dimensional (2D) cell culture to elucidate the functions of TGF-β1; however, 2D culture does not represent the complex three-dimensional (3D) in vivo environment. Using a synthetic hyaluronan (HA) extracellular matrix (ECM) hydrogel, we investigated the effect of TGF-β1 on fibroblasts cultured in three conditions--on tissue culture polystyrene (TCP), on HA (2D), and in HA (3D). After TGF-β1 treatment (0.1 to 20 ng/mL), morphological features and ECM regulation were analyzed by immunocytochemistry, Western blot, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and zymogram assays. On TCP, cells showed the typical spindle shape with strong alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) staining of cytoplasmic myofilaments along the cell axes after TGF-β1 treatment; on HA (2D), spindle-shape cells showed little α-SMA staining; in HA (3D), cells were smaller and rounded with less α-SMA deposition. The α-SMA gene and protein expression on TCP were significantly upregulated by TGF-β1, but TGF-β1 did not induce α-SMA expression in the presence of HA (both 2D and 3D). 3D HA culture significantly downregulated collagen I, III, and fibronectin expression, increased matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 2 (MMP1/MMP2) activity, upregulated MMP1 mRNA and downregulated TIMP3 mRNA expression. This study suggested that exogenous HA, particularly in 3D culture, appears to suppress ECM production, enhances ECM degradation and remodeling, and inhibits myofibroblast differentiation without decreasing TGF-β receptor expression.<newchar><newabs>23316965<newchar>A group of proteases, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are well known for their capacity to degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Particularly MMP-2 and MMP-9 contribute to the degradation and reorganization of the ECM components and are involved in the pathophysiology of cardiovascular remodeling. Imbalanced MMP activity promotes vascular smooth muscle cells and migration and proliferation and endothelial dysfunction, thus resulting in increased cardiovascular stiffness and hypertrophy. Furthermore, MMP-2 cleaves non-ECM protein substrates including cellular receptors and intracellular proteins, thus causing cardiac and vascular dysfunction. It is now becoming clear that increased MMP activity promotes long-lasting cardiovascular structural and functional alterations in both experimental and clinical hypertension, and this alteration may contribute to sustained hypertension and its complications. Other pathogenic mechanisms including activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and oxidative stress activate and upregulate MMPs. Therefore, MMP inhibition may prevent the deleterious consequences of hypertension to the cardiovascular system. This review article will focus on growing evidence supporting the relevance of MMPs in hypertension and the effects of MMP inhibitors. Particularly, the effects of doxycycline used as a non selective MMP inhibitor in experimental and clinical studies will be discussed.<newchar><newabs>24651374<newchar>Vast research efforts have been devoted to providing clinical diagnostic markers of myocardial infarction (MI), leading to over one million abstracts associated with &quot;MI&quot; and &quot;Cardiovascular Diseases&quot; in PubMed. Accumulation of the research results imposed a challenge to integrate and interpret these results. To address this problem and better understand how the left ventricle (LV) remodels post-MI at both the molecular and cellular levels, we propose here an integrative framework that couples computational methods and experimental data. We selected an initial set of MI-related proteins from published human studies and constructed an MI-specific protein-protein-interaction network (MIPIN). Structural and functional analysis of the MIPIN showed that the post-MI LV exhibited increased representation of proteins involved in transcriptional activity, inflammatory response, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Known plasma or serum expression changes of the MIPIN proteins in patients with MI were acquired by data mining of the PubMed and UniProt knowledgebase, and served as a training set to predict unlabeled MIPIN protein changes post-MI. The predictions were validated with published results in PubMed, suggesting prognosticative capability of the MIPIN. Further, we established the first knowledge map related to the post-MI response, providing a major step towards enhancing our understanding of molecular interactions specific to MI and linking the molecular interaction, cellular responses, and biological processes to quantify LV remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16645142<newchar>Heart valve disease is an important cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Little is known about valve disease pathogenesis, but increasing evidence implicates a genetic basis for valve disease, suggesting a developmental origin. Although the cellular and molecular processes involved in early valvulogenesis have been well described, less is known about the regulation of valve extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and valvular interstitial cell (VIC) distribution that characterize the mature valve structure. Histochemistry, immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy were used to examine ECM organization, VIC distribution, and cell proliferation during late valvulogenesis in chicken and mouse. In mature valves, ECM organization is conserved across species, and developmental studies demonstrate that ECM stratification begins during late embryonic cusp remodeling and continues into postnatal life. Cell proliferation decreases concomitant with ECM stratification and VIC compartmentalization. Explanted, stenotic bicuspid aortic valves (BAVs) from pediatric patients were also examined. The diseased valves exhibited disruption of the highly organized ECM and VIC distribution seen in normal valves. Cusps from diseased valves were thickened with increased and disorganized collagens and proteoglycans, decreased and fragmented elastic fibers, and cellular disarray without calcification or cell proliferation. Taken together, these studies show that normal valve development is characterized by spatiotemporal coordination of ECM organization and VIC compartmentalization and that these developmental processes are disrupted in pediatric patients with diseased BAVs.<newchar><newabs>25063001<newchar>Biologically relevant, three-dimensional extracellular matrix is an essential component of in vitro vasculogenesis models. WI-38 fibroblasts assemble a 3D matrix that induces endothelial tubulogenesis, but this model is challenged by fibroblast senescence and the inability to distinguish endothelial cell-derived matrix from matrix made by WI-38 fibroblasts. Matrices produced by hTERT-immortalized WI-38 recapitulated those produced by wild type fibroblasts. ECM fibrils were heavily populated by tenascin-C, fibronectin, and type VI collagen. Nearly half of the total type I collagen, but only a small fraction of the type IV collagen, were incorporated into ECM. Stable hTERT-WI-38 transfectants expressing TagRFP-fibronectin incorporated TagRFP into ~90% of the fibronectin in 3D matrices. TagRFP-fibronectin colocalized with tenascin-C and with type I collagen in a pattern that was similar to that seen in matrices from wild type WI-38. Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) formed 3D adhesions and tubes on WI38-hTERT-TagRFP-FN-derived matrices, and the TagRFP-fibronectin component of this new 3D human fibroblast matrix model facilitated the demonstration of concentrated membrane type 1 metalloprotease and new HUVEC FN and collagen type IV fibrils during EC tubulogenesis. These findings indicate that WI-38-hTERT- and WI-38-hTERT-TagRFP-FN-derived matrices provide platforms for the definition of new matrix assembly and remodeling events during vasculogenesis.<newchar>3D-matrix<n-term>endothelium<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>vasculogenesis<n-term><newabs>23932291<newchar>Cancer invasion and metastasis remains the root cause of mortality. This process involves alterations of tumor microenvironment, particularly the remodeling of extracellular matrix, characterized by collagen IV uncoiling, degradation, fragments deposition and cross-linking. Quantum dots-labeled molecular probes are promising platforms to simultaneously study several subtle changes of key biomolecules, because of their unique optical and chemical properties. Here we report on a quantum dots-based imaging technology to study key components in tumor microenvironment during cancer progression, so as to gain new insights into the role of collagen IV plays, to define the cancer &quot;invasion unit&quot; and to develop the &quot;pulse-mode&quot; of cancer invasion.<newchar>Cancer invasion mode<n-term>Collagen IV<n-term>ECM remodeling<n-term>Multiplexed imaging<n-term>Quantum dots<n-term><newabs>23432060<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis is associated with most cardiac diseases. Fibrosis is an accumulation of excessive extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) synthesized by cardiac fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. Fibroblasts are the most prevalent cell type in the heart, comprising 75% of cardiac cells. Myofibroblasts are hardly present in healthy normal heart tissue, but appear abundantly in diseased hearts. Cardiac fibroblasts are activated by a variety of pathological stimuli, such as myocardial injury, oxidative stress, mechanical stretch, and elevated autocrine-paracrine mediators, thereby undergoing proliferation, differentiation to myofibroblasts, and production of various cytokines and ECM proteins. A number of signaling pathways and bioactive molecules are involved and work in concert to activate fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in the fibrogenesis cascade. Fibroblasts and myofibroblasts are not only principal ECM producers, but also play a central role in fibrogenesis and myocardial remodeling in fibrotic heart disease. Thus, understanding the biological processes of cardiac fibroblasts will provide novel insights into the underlying mechanisms of fibrosis and provide potential targets for developing antifibrotic drugs. Recent studies demonstrate that Ca2+ signal is essential for fibroblast proliferation, differentiation, and ECM-protein production. This review focuses on the recent advances in understanding molecular mechanisms of Ca2+ signaling in cardiac fibrogenesis, and potential role of Ca(2+)-permeable channels, in particular, the transient potential (TRP) channels in fibrotic heart disease. TRP channels are highly expressed in cardiac fibroblasts. TRPM7 has been shown to be essential in TGFβ1 mediated fibrogenesis, and TRPC3 has been demonstrated to play an essential role in regulating fibroblast function. Thus, the Ca2+-permeable TRP channels may serve as potential novel targets for developing anti-fibrotic drugs.<newchar><newabs>24333025<newchar>Currently available heart valve replacements are limited in long-term performance or fail due to leaflet thickening, lack of growth or remodeling potential. In order to address these issues, it is necessary to mimic multiple factors of the native valvular extracellular matrix (ECM) such as architecture, mechanical behavior and biochemical signals. Here, we successfully generated an electrospun PEGdma-PLA scaffold adapted to the structure and mechanical properties of native valve leaflets. Valvular interstitial cells (VICs) and valvular endothelial cells (VECs) were seeded on the scaffold and when cultured under physiological conditions in a bioreactor, the construct performed like a native leaflet. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was employed to obtain detailed mechanical information from the leaflets, which enabled the first layer-specific measurement of the Young's modulus. Interestingly, spongiosa stiffness was much lower compared to the fibrosa and ventricularis. Moreover, investigations into human fetal heart valve development identified collagen type I and versican as important structural proteins. As a proof of principle, these proteins were introduced to the scaffold, demonstrating the ability to bio-functionalize the hybrid valve based on natures' blueprint.<newchar>Cardiac tissue engineering<n-term>ECM (extracellular matrix)<n-term>Mechanical properties<n-term>Nanotopography<n-term>Non-woven fabric<n-term><newabs>24549574<newchar>Currently, there are several studies supporting the role of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) system in cancer. The association of uPA to its receptor triggers the conversion of plasminogen into plasmin. This process is regulated by the uPA inhibitors (PAI-1 and PAI-2). Plasmin promotes degradation of basement membrane and extracellular matrix (ECM) components as well as activation of ECM latent matrix metalloproteases. Degradation and remodeling of the surrounding tissues is crucial in the early steps of tumor progression by facilitating expansion of the tumor mass, release of tumor growth factors, activation of cytokines as well as induction of tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Hence, many tumors showed a correlation between uPA system component levels and tumor aggressiveness and survival. Therefore, this review summarizes the structure of the uPA system, its contribution to cancer progression, and the clinical relevance of uPA family members in cancer diagnosis. In addition, the review evaluates the significance of uPA system in the development of cancer-targeted therapies.<newchar>cancer<n-term>invasion<n-term>metastasis<n-term>prognosis<n-term>urokinase<n-term><newabs>21303718<newchar>A biohybrid composite consisting of extracellular matrix (ECM) gel from porcine dermal tissue and biodegradable elastomeric fibers was generated and evaluated for soft tissue applications. ECM gel possesses attractive biocompatibility and bioactivity with weak mechanical properties and rapid degradation, while electrospun biodegradable poly(ester urethane)urea (PEUU) has good mechanical properties but limited cellular infiltration and tissue integration. A concurrent gel electrospray/polymer electrospinning method was employed to create ECM gel/PEUU fiber composites with attractive mechanical properties, including high flexibility and strength. Electron microscopy revealed a structure of interconnected fibrous layers embedded in ECM gel. Tensile mechanical properties could be tuned by altering the PEUU/ECM weight ratio. Scaffold tensile strengths for PEUU/ECM ratios of 67/33, 72/28 and 80/20 ranged from 80 to 187 kPa in the longitudinal axis (parallel to the collecting mandrel axis) and 41-91 kPa in the circumferential axis with 645-938% breaking strains. The 72/28 biohybrid composite and a control scaffold generated from electrospun PEUU alone were implanted into Lewis rats, replacing a full-thickness abdominal wall defect. At 4 wk, no infection or herniation was found at the implant site. Histological staining showed extensive cellular infiltration into the biohybrid scaffold with the newly developed tissue well integrated with the native periphery, while minimal cellular ingress into the electrospun PEUU scaffold was observed. Mechanical testing of explanted constructs showed evidence of substantial remodeling, with composite scaffolds adopting properties more comparable to the native abdominal wall. The described elastic biohybrid material imparts features of ECM gel bioactivity with PEUU strength and handling to provide a promising composite biomaterial for soft tissue repair and replacement.<newchar><newabs>16944420<newchar>Follicular rupture and the transformation of an estrogenic preovulatory follicle into a highly vascularized corpus luteum capable of producing large quantities of progesterone are required for the establishment of pregnancy. These processes are dependent upon the precise remodeling of the ovarian extracellular matrix (ECM). Such remodeling occurs both at the level of synthesis and/or proteolytic degradation of ECM proteins. Enzymes known to have important roles in ovarian ECM remodeling include matrix metalloproteinases, plasminogen activators/plasmin, and ADAMTS ( ADisintegrin And Metalloproteinase with Thrombo Spondin-like motifs). Each of the preceding proteases has corresponding inhibitors capable of regulating proteolytic activity temporally and spatially. This review focuses on recent contributions to our understanding of ovarian ECM remodeling that have furthered our appreciation of the role of proteinases in ovulation and the differentiation of follicular cells into the luteal phenotype.<newchar><newabs>25745999<newchar>Heparanase-1 (HPSE) plays a pivotal role in structural remodeling of the ECM and the glycocalyx, thus conferring protumorigenic, proangiogenic and prometastatic properties to many cancer entities. In addition to its extracellular function, recent studies suggest an intracellular activity of HPSE with a largely unknown significance during tumor progression. Therefore, we investigated the relevance of the dual functions of HPSE to malignant melanoma in vitro, as well as in different mouse melanoma models based on the intradermal or intravenous injection of melanoma cells. Consistent with its extracellular action, an HPSE deficiency led to a reduced shedding of the glycocalyx accompanied by a reduced availability of vascular endothelial growth factor, affecting tumor growth and vascularization. In contrast, we measured an elevated expression of the protumorigenic factors pentraxin-3, tissue factor, TNF-α and most prominently, MMP-9, upon HPSE knockdown. In vivo, an HPSE deficiency was related to increased lymph node metastasis. Since the inhibition of its extracellular function with heparin was unable to block the gene regulatory impact of HPSE, we proposed an intracellular mechanism. Immunostaining revealed a counter-staining of HPSE and NF-κB in the nucleus, suggesting a close relationship between both proteins. This finding was further supported by the discovery of a direct charge-driven molecular interaction between HPSE and DNA by using atomic force microscopy and a co-precipitation approach. Our findings are novel and point towards a dual function for HPSE in malignant melanoma with a protumorigenic extracellular activity and a tumor-suppressive nuclear action. The identification of molecular strategies to shuttle extracellular HPSE into the nuclei of cancer cells could provide new therapeutic options.<newchar><newabs>23912712<newchar>Chronic inflammation and excessive protease activity have a major role in the persistence of non-healing wounds. Granzyme B (GzmB) is a serine protease expressed during chronic inflammation that, in conjunction with perforin, has a well-established role in initiating apoptotic cell death. GzmB is also capable of acting extracellularly, independent of perforin and can degrade several extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that are critical during wound healing. We used apolipoprotein E (ApoE) knockout (AKO) mice as a novel model of chronic inflammation and impaired wound healing to investigate the role of GzmB in chronic wounds. Wild-type and AKO mice were grown to 7 weeks (young) or 37 weeks (old) of age on a regular chow or high-fat diet (HFD), given a 1-cm diameter full thickness wound on their mid dorsum and allowed to heal for 16 days. Old AKO mice fed a HFD exhibited reduced wound closure, delayed contraction, chronic inflammation and altered ECM remodeling. Conversely, GzmB/ApoE double knockout mice displayed improved wound closure and contraction rates. In addition, murine GzmB was found to degrade both fibronectin and vitronectin derived from healthy mouse granulation tissue. In addition, GzmB-mediated degradation of fibronectin generated a fragment similar in size to that observed in non-healing mouse wounds. These results provide the first direct evidence that GzmB contributes to chronic wound healing in part through degradation of ECM.<newchar><newabs>16172745<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a major group of proteases known to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and so they have been suggested to be important in the process of lung disease associated with tissue remodeling. This has led to the concept that modulation of airway remodeling including excessive proteolysis damage to the tissue may be of interest for future treatment. Within the MMP family, macrophage elastase (MMP-12) is able to degrade ECM components such as elastin and is involved in tissue remodeling processes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease including emphysema. Pulmonary fibrosis has an aggressive course and is usually fatal within an average of 3 to 6 years after the onset of symptoms. Pulmonary fibrosis is associated with deposition of ECM components in the lung interstitium. The excessive airway remodeling as a result of an imbalance in the equilibrium of the normal processes of synthesis and degradation of ECM components could justify anti-protease treatments. Indeed, the correlation of the differences in hydroxyproline levels in the lungs of bleomycin-treated mice strongly suggests that a reduced molar pro-MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is associated with collagen deposition, beginning as early as the inflammatory events at day 1 after bleomycin administration. Finally, these observations emphasize that effective treatment of these disorders must be started early during the natural history of the disease, prior to the development of extensive lung destruction and fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>19121538<newchar>Recently, macrophages have been characterized as having an M1 or M2 phenotype based on receptor expression, cytokine and effector molecule production, and function. The effects of macrophage phenotype upon tissue remodeling following the implantation of a biomaterial are largely unknown. The objectives of this study were to determine the effects of a cellular component within an implanted extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold upon macrophage phenotype, and to determine the relationship between macrophage phenotype and tissue remodeling. Partial-thickness defects in the abdominal wall musculature of Sprague-Dawley rats were repaired with autologous body wall tissue, acellular allogeneic rat body wall ECM, xenogeneic pig urinary bladder tissue, or acellular xenogeneic pig urinary bladder ECM. At 3, 7, 14, and 28 days the host tissue response was characterized using histologic, immunohistochemical, and RT-PCR methods. The acellular test articles were shown to elicit a predominantly M2 type response and resulted in constructive remodeling, while those containing a cellular component, even an autologous cellular component, elicited a predominantly M1 type response and resulted in deposition of dense connective tissue and/or scarring. We conclude that the presence of cellular material within an ECM scaffold modulates the phenotype of the macrophages participating in the host response following implantation, and that the phenotype of the macrophages participating in the host response appears to be related to tissue remodeling outcome.<newchar><newabs>24647357<newchar>Tanshinone IIA has definite protective effects on various cardiovascular diseases. However, in hypertension-induced left ventricular hypertrophy (H-LVH), the signaling pathways of tanshinone IIA in inhibition of remodeling and cardiac dysfunction remain unclear. Two-kidney, one-clip induced hypertensive rats (n = 32) were randomized to receive tanshinone IIA (5, 10, 15 mg/kg per day) or 5% glucose injection (GS). Sham-operated rats (n = 8) received 5%GS as control. Cardiac function and dimensions were assessed by using an echocardiography system. Histological determination of the fibrosis and apoptosis was performed using hematoxylin eosin, Masson's trichrome and TUNEL staining. Matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases type 2 (TIMP2) protein expressions in rat myocardial tissues were detected by immunohistochemistry. Rat cardiomyocytes were isolated by a Langendorff perfusion method. After 48 h culture, the supernatant and cardiomyocytes were collected to determine the potential related proteins impact on cardiac fibrosis and apoptosis. Compared with the sham rats, the heart tissues of H-LVH (5%GS) group suffered severely from the oxidative damage, apoptosis of cardiomyocytes and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. In the H-LVH group, tanshinone IIA treated decreased malondialdehyde (MDA) content and increased superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity. Tanshinone IIA inhibited cardiomyocytes apoptosis as confirmed by the reduction of TUNEL positive cardiomyocytes and the down-regulation of Caspase-3 activity and Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. Meanwhile, plasma apelin level increased with down-regulation of APJ receptor. Tanshinone IIA suppressed cardiac fibrosis through regulating the paracrine factors released by cardiomyocytes and the TGF-β/Smads signaling pathway activity. In conclusion, our in vivo study showed that tanshinone IIA could improve heart function by enhancing myocardial contractility, inhibiting ECM deposition, and limiting apoptosis of cardiomyocytes and oxidative damage.<newchar><newabs>26338673<newchar>Gene expression profiling has been introduced into drug development to understand the activity of chemical entities in pre-clinical settings. The present study investigates the changes induced in gene expression by the ruthenium-based compound NAMI-A. The genes differentially expressed by NAMI-A are evaluated through whole-transcriptome analysis and RNA-sequencing in the metastatic MDA-MB-231 mammary carcinoma cells, in comparison to the non-tumorigenic HBL-100 mammary gland cells. NAMI-A treatment rapidly induces a relevant gene up-regulation that quickly returns to normal values. These changes differ between MDA-MB-231 and HBL-100 cells, highlighting the selectivity of the NAMI-A induced transcriptional perturbation in the invasive rather than in the non-tumorigenic cells. The transcriptional response, in the invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, comprises a set of early-response transcription factors and reveals a pharmacological signature in good agreement with the most peculiar NAMI-A behavior as a metastasis inhibitor such as cell cycle regulation and ECM remodeling. Globally, the results of this study indicate some transcription factors influencing the expression and activity of many downstream genes and proteins fundamentally involved in the functional effects of NAMI-A in vitro and in vivo.<newchar><newabs>26358383<newchar>In this issue, Rohani et al. (2015) report on the role of macrophage-derived stromelysin-2 (matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-10) in promoting the turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) during cutaneous wound repair. They provide evidence that MMP-10 specifically enhances collagenolytic activity of murine MMP-13 produced by M2-like macrophages. These results emphasize the important role of macrophage-derived MMP-10 in regulating tissue remodeling and scar formation during wound healing.<newchar><newabs>26578790<newchar>Chronic, low grade, sterile inflammation frequently accompanies aging and age-related diseases. Cellular senescence is associated with the production of proinflammatory chemokines, cytokines, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling proteases, which comprise the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). We found a higher burden of senescent cells in adipose tissue with aging. Senescent human primary preadipocytes as well as human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) developed a SASP that could be suppressed by targeting the JAK pathway using RNAi or JAK inhibitors. Conditioned medium (CM) from senescent human preadipocytes induced macrophage migration in vitro and inflammation in healthy adipose tissue and preadipocytes. When the senescent cells from which CM was derived had been treated with JAK inhibitors, the resulting CM was much less proinflammatory. The administration of JAK inhibitor to aged mice for 10 wk alleviated both adipose tissue and systemic inflammation and enhanced physical function. Our findings are consistent with a possible contribution of senescent cells and the SASP to age-related inflammation and frailty. We speculate that SASP inhibition by JAK inhibitors may contribute to alleviating frailty. Targeting the JAK pathway holds promise for treating age-related dysfunction.<newchar>JAK/STAT pathway<n-term>cellular senescence<n-term>frailty<n-term>interleukin-6<n-term>ruxolitinib<n-term><newabs>23583823<newchar>During cardiac remodeling, cardiac fibroblasts (CF) are influenced by increased levels of interleukin-1α (IL-1α) and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFβ1). The present study investigated the interaction between these two important cytokines on function of human CF and their differentiation to myofibroblasts (CMF). CF were isolated from human atrial appendage and exposed to IL-1α and/or TGFβ1 (both 0.1 ng/ml). mRNA expression levels of selected genes were determined after 6-24h by real-time RT-PCR, while protein levels were analyzed at 24-48 h by ELISA or western blot. Activation of canonical signaling pathways (NFκB, Smad3, p38 MAPK) was determined by western blotting. Differentiation to CMF was examined by collagen gel contraction assays. Exposure of CF to IL-1α alone enhanced levels of IL-6, IL-8, matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) and collagen III (COL3A1), but reduced the CMF markers α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2). By contrast, TGFβ1 alone had minor effects on IL-6, IL-8 and MMP3 levels, but significantly increased levels of the CMF markers αSMA, CTGF, COL1A1 and COL3A1. Co-stimulation with both IL-1α and TGFβ1 increased MMP3 expression synergistically. Furthermore, while TGFβ1 had no effect on IL-1α-induced IL-6 or IL-8 levels, co-stimulation inhibited the TGFβ1-induced increase in αSMA and blocked the gel contraction caused by TGFβ1. Combining IL-1α and TGFβ1 had no apparent effect on their canonical signaling pathways. In conclusion, IL-1α and TGFβ1 act synergistically to stimulate MMP3 expression in CF. Moreover, IL-1α has a dominant inhibitory effect on the phenotypic switch of CF to CMF induced by TGFβ1.<newchar>CF<n-term>CMF<n-term>COL1A1<n-term>COL3A1<n-term>CTGF<n-term>Cardiac fibroblasts<n-term>Cytokines<n-term>ECM<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>IL<n-term>Inflammation<n-term>MMP<n-term>Remodeling<n-term>TGFβ1<n-term>TNFα<n-term>alpha-smooth muscle actin<n-term>cardiac fibroblast<n-term>cardiac myofibroblast<n-term>collagen I<n-term>collagen III<n-term>connective tissue growth factor<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>interleukin<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>transforming growth factor β1<n-term>tumor necrosis factor α<n-term>αSMA<n-term><newabs>19003945<newchar>Pathological remodeling characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation contributes to diabetic nephropathy (DN). This study evaluated the effects of Ginkgo biloba extract (GbE) on the metabolism of the ECM in rat mesangial cells cultured in hyperglycemic conditions. The cultured mesangial cells in high glucose conditions were allotted into six groups: normal control group, high glucose group, low concentration of GbE group, moderate concentration of GbE group, high concentration of GbE group, and captopril group. In the presence of high glucose, the levels of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) were decreased significantly, and the levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) were increased significantly. These changes were reversed by GbE. GbE lowered the levels of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) of the high glucose group. Furthermore, GbE also decreased the expressions of collagen IV and laminin of the high glucose group. In summary, the results suggest that GbE postpones the extracellular matrix accumulation by inhibiting the synthesis of ECM and promoting the degradation of ECM, and therefore, is a potential drug for the prevention and treatment of DN.<newchar><newabs>23797907<newchar>The evolution of a solid tumor is fueled by genetic aberrations. Yet, the tumor environment often dominates over the effects of genetics: normal tissues have powerful tumor-suppressive properties that constantly tame or eliminate cells carrying transforming mutations. Critical elements of such a suppressive microenvironment are structural characteristics of normal cells and tissues, such as cell polarity, attachment to the extracellular matrix (ECM), and epithelial organization. Once these tissue-level checkpoints have been overcome, tumor growth is enhanced by recruitment of stromal cells and remodeling of the ECM. Genetic inactivation in mouse models indicates the Hippo pathway as a fundamental inhibitor of organ growth during development and as a critical tumor suppressor in epithelial tissues, such as the liver, skin, and ovaries, and soft tissues. At the centerpiece of this pathway lie two related transcriptional coactivators, YAP and TAZ, that promote tissue proliferation and the self-renewal of normal and cancer stem cells, and incite metastasis. Strikingly, YAP and TAZ are controlled by the same architectural features that first inhibit and then foster cancer growth, such as ECM elasticity, cell shape, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These findings open unexpected opportunities for the development of new cancer therapeutics targeting key YAP/TAZ regulatory inputs such as Wnt signaling, cytoskeletal contractility, G-protein-coupled receptors, or YAP/TAZ-regulated transcription.<newchar><newabs>26112417<newchar>Despite major advances in our understanding of TGF-β signaling in multiple cell types, little is known about the direct target genes of this pathway in human eosinophils. These cells constitute the major inflammatory component present in the sputum and lung of active asthmatics and their numbers correlate well with disease severity. During the transition from acute to chronic asthma, TGF-β levels rise several fold in the lung which drives fibroblasts to produce extracellular matrix (ECM) and participate in airway and parenchymal remodeling. In this report, we use purified blood eosinophils from healthy donors and analyze baseline and TGF-β responsive genes by RNA Seq, and demonstrate that eosinophils (PBE) express 7981 protein-coding genes of which 178 genes are up-regulated and 199 genes are down-regulated by TGF-β. While 18 target genes have been previously associated with asthma and eosinophilic disorders, the vast majority have been implicated in cell death and survival, differentiation, and cellular function. Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed that 126 canonical pathways are activated by TGF-β including iNOS, TREM1, p53, IL-8 and IL-10 signaling. As TGF-β is an important cytokine for eosinophil function and survival, and pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis, our results represent a significant step toward the identification of novel TGF-β responsive genes and provide a potential therapeutic opportunity by selectively targeting relevant genes and pathways.<newchar>Asthma<n-term>Blood<n-term>Eosinophils<n-term>Gene expression<n-term>Human<n-term>RNA-Seq<n-term>TGF-β<n-term><newabs>25723058<newchar>Diabetic retinopathy is one of the most important causes of blindness. The underlying mechanisms of this disease include inflammatory changes and remodeling processes of the extracellular-matrix (ECM) leading to pericyte and vascular endothelial cell damage that affects the retinal circulation. In turn, this causes hypoxia leading to release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to induce the angiogenesis process. Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is the most important circulating inhibitor of serine proteases (SERPIN). Its targets include elastase, plasmin, thrombin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, proteinase 3 (PR-3) and plasminogen activator (PAI). AAT modulates the effect of protease-activated receptors (PARs) during inflammatory responses. Plasma levels of AAT can increase 4-fold during acute inflammation then is so-called acute phase protein (APPs). Individuals with low serum levels of AAT could develop disease in lung, liver and pancreas. AAT is involved in extracellular matrix remodeling and inflammation, particularly migration and chemotaxis of neutrophils. It can also suppress nitric oxide (NO) by nitric oxide sintase (NOS) inhibition. AAT binds their targets in an irreversible way resulting in product degradation. The aim of this review is to focus on the points of contact between multiple factors involved in diabetic retinopathy and AAT resembling pleiotropic effects that might be beneficial.<newchar><newabs>23592958<newchar>Vascular development is a complex process regulated by dynamic biological networks that vary in topology and state across different tissues and developmental stages. Signals regulating de novo blood vessel formation (vasculogenesis) and remodeling (angiogenesis) come from a variety of biological pathways linked to endothelial cell (EC) behavior, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and the local generation of chemokines and growth factors. Simulating these interactions at a systems level requires sufficient biological detail about the relevant molecular pathways and associated cellular behaviors, and tractable computational models that offset mathematical and biological complexity. Here, we describe a novel multicellular agent-based model of vasculogenesis using the CompuCell3D (http://www.compucell3d.org/) modeling environment supplemented with semi-automatic knowledgebase creation. The model incorporates vascular endothelial growth factor signals, pro- and anti-angiogenic inflammatory chemokine signals, and the plasminogen activating system of enzymes and proteases linked to ECM interactions, to simulate nascent EC organization, growth and remodeling. The model was shown to recapitulate stereotypical capillary plexus formation and structural emergence of non-coded cellular behaviors, such as a heterologous bridging phenomenon linking endothelial tip cells together during formation of polygonal endothelial cords. Molecular targets in the computational model were mapped to signatures of vascular disruption derived from in vitro chemical profiling using the EPA's ToxCast high-throughput screening (HTS) dataset. Simulating the HTS data with the cell-agent based model of vascular development predicted adverse effects of a reference anti-angiogenic thalidomide analog, 5HPP-33, on in vitro angiogenesis with respect to both concentration-response and morphological consequences. These findings support the utility of cell agent-based models for simulating a morphogenetic series of events and for the first time demonstrate the applicability of these models for predictive toxicology.<newchar><newabs>25927238<newchar>Transforming growth factor (TGF)β acts on fibroblasts to promote the production and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). In adult humans, excessive action of TGFβ is associated with fibrotic disease and fibroproliferative conditions, including gingival hyperplasia. Understanding how the TGFβ1 signals in fibroblasts is therefore likely to result in valuable insights into the fundamental mechanisms underlying fibroproliferative disorders. Previously, we used the TAK1 inhibitor (5Z)-7-Oxozeaenol to show that, in dermal fibroblasts, the non-canonical TAK1 pathway mediates the ability of TGFβ1 to induce genes promoting tissue remodeling and repair. However, the extent to which TAK1 mediates fibroproliferative responses in fibroblasts in response to TGFβ1 remains unclear. Herein, we show that, in gingival fibroblasts, (5Z)-7-Oxozeaenol blocks the ability of TGFβ1 to induce expression of the pro-fibrotic mediator CCN2 (connective tissue growth factor, CTGF) and type I collagen protein. Moreover, genome-wide expression profiling revealed that, in gingival fibroblasts, (5Z)-7-Oxozeaenol reduces the ability of TGFβ1 to induce mRNA expression of essentially all TGFβ1-responsive genes (139/147), including those involved with a hyperproliferative response. Results from microarray analysis were confirmed using real time polymerase chain reaction analysis and a functional cell proliferation assay. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that TAK1 inhibitors might be useful in treating fibroproliferative disorders, including that in the oral cavity.<newchar><newabs>20109532<newchar>The hypothalamo-neurohypophysial system (HNS) consisting of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin (OXT) magnocellular neurons shows the structural plasticity including the rearrangement of synapses, dendrites, and neurovascular contacts during chronic physiological stimulation. In this study, we examined the remodeling of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), main extracellular matrix (ECM), in the HNS after salt loading known as a chronic stimulation to cause the structural plasticity. In the supraoptic nucleus (SON), confocal microscopic observation revealed that the immunoreactivity of 6B4 proteoglycans (PG) was observed mainly at AVP-positive magnocellular neurons but that of neurocan was seen chiefly at OXT-positive magnocellular neurons. The immunoreactivity of phosphacan and aggrecan was seen at both AVP- and OXT-positive magnocellular neurons. Electron microscopic observation further showed that the immunoreactivity of phosphacan and neurocan was observed at astrocytic processes to surround somata, dendrites, and terminals, but not synaptic junctions. In the neurohypophysis (NH), the immunoreactivity of phosphacan, 6B4 PGs, and neurocan was observed at AVP-positive magnocellular terminals, but the reactivity of Wisteria floribunda agglutinin lectin was seen at OXT-positive ones. The immunoreactivity of versican was found at microvessel and that of aggrecan was not detected in the NH. Quantitative morphometrical analysis showed that the chronic physiological stimulation by 7-day salt loading decreased the level of 6B4 PGs in the SON and the level of phosphacan, 6B4 PGs, and neurocan in the NH. These results suggest that the extracellular microenvironment of CSPGs is different between AVP and OXT magnocellular neurons and activity-dependent remodeling of CSPGs could be involved in the structural plasticity of the HNS.<newchar><newabs>17127391<newchar>Left ventricular (LV) remodeling is a process whereby structural alterations attempt to compensate altered hemodynamic load. In the chronic setting this process becomes maladaptive, self-sustaining and is associated with worsened survival. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the heart, once believed an inert scaffold for cardiomyocytes, is now known to play an important role in LV remodeling. The enzyme system primarily responsible for ECM turnover is the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and these enzymes are robustly altered in cardiovascular pathologies, including myocardial infarction (MI) and ischemic heart failure. A cause-and-effect relationship has been established between MMPs and LV remodeling post MI, as MMP inhibition prevents LV dilation and preserves cardiac function in animal models of infarction. In spite of this, initial clinical experience with MMP inhibition post MI has been disappointing. This review examines the structural and functional roles of the myocardial ECM, the evidence for MMP involvement in LV remodeling, and recent investigations into MMPs as prognostic markers and therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>23430124<newchar>Heart failure in chronic type 2 diabetes mellitus is partly attributable to adverse structural remodelling of the left ventricle (LV), but the contribution of hyperglycaemia (HG) per se in remodelling processes is debated. In this study, we examined the molecular signature of LV remodelling in 18-month-old spontaneously diabetic male Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats that represent a long-term mildly diabetic phenotype, using histological, immunoblotting and quantitative gene expression approaches. Relative to age-matched Wistar controls, mildly diabetic GK rats presented with LV hypertrophy, increased expression of natriuretic peptides and phosphorylation of pro-hypertrophic Akt. Fibrosis proliferation in the GK LV paralleled increased transcriptional and biologically active pro-fibrogenic transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFβ1) in the LV with upregulated mRNA abundance for key extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as fibronectin, collagen type(s) 1 and 3α and regulators including matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9, and their tissue inhibitor (TIMP) 4, connexin 43 and α5-integrin. GK rats also presented with altered mRNA expression for cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)ATPase, Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger and the L-type Ca(2+) channels which may contribute to the altered Ca(2+) transient kinetics previously observed in this model at 18 months of age (t test, p &lt; 0.05 vs. age-matched Wistar control for all parameters). The results indicate that chronic mild HG can produce the molecular and structural correlates of a hypertrophic myopathy. Diffuse ECM proliferation in this model is possibly a product of HG-induced TGFβ1 upregulation and altered transcriptional profile of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>20110414<newchar>Recent pregnancy correlates with decreased survival for breast cancer patients compared with non-pregnancy-associated breast cancer. We hypothesize that postpartum mammary involution induces metastasis through wound-healing programs known to promote cancer. It is unknown whether alternatively activated M2 macrophages, immune cells important in wound-healing and experimental tumorigenesis that also predict poor prognosis for breast cancer patients, are recruited to the normal involuting gland. Macrophage markers CD68, CSF-1R, and F4/80 were examined across the pregnancy and involution cycle in rodent and human mammary tissues. Quantitative immunohistochemistry revealed up to an eightfold increase in macrophage number during involution, which returned to nulliparous levels with full regression. The involution macrophages exhibit an M2 phenotype as determined by high arginase-1 and low inducible nitric oxide synthase staining in rodent tissue, and by mannose receptor expression in human breast tissue. M2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 also peaked during involution. Extracellular matrix (ECM) isolated from involuting rat mammary glands was chemotactic for macrophages compared with nulliparous mammary ECM. Fibrillar collagen levels and proteolysis increased dramatically during involution, and denatured collagen I acted as a strong chemoattractant for macrophages in cell culture, suggesting proteolyzed fibrillar collagen as a candidate ECM mediator of macrophage recruitment. M2 macrophages, IL-4, IL-13, fibrillar collagen accumulation, and proteolysis of collagen are all components of tumor promotional microenvironments, and thus may mediate promotion of breast cancers arising in the postpartum setting.<newchar><newabs>24935046<newchar>Injury to the CNS typically results in significant morbidity and endogenous repair mechanisms are limited in their ability to restore fully functional CNS tissue. Biologic scaffolds composed of individual purified components have been shown to facilitate functional tissue reconstruction following CNS injury. Extracellular matrix scaffolds derived from mammalian tissues retain a number of bioactive molecules and their ability for CNS repair has recently been recognized. In addition, novel biomaterials for dural mater repairs are of clinical interest as the dura provides barrier function and maintains homeostasis to CNS. The present article describes the application of regenerative medicine principles to the CNS tissues and dural mater repair. While many approaches have been exploring the use of cells and/or therapeutic molecules, the strategies described herein focus upon the use of extracellular matrix scaffolds derived from mammalian tissues that are free of cells and exogenous factors.<newchar>CNS<n-term>ECM<n-term>biologic scaffold<n-term>constructive remodeling<n-term>decellularization<n-term>regeneration<n-term><newabs>23983782<newchar>We previously reported that the increased level of perlecan with altered glycosaminoglycan (GAG) substitution was present in the placenta with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and in the trophoblasts cultured under hyperglycemic condition. Trophoblast is the first cell lineage to differentiate, invasive, and migrate into the vessel tissues of placenta and fetal membrane during pregnancy. Therefore, active matrix remodeling and vessel formation must occur during placentation. In this study, we further investigated whether hyperglycemia-induced alterations of perlecan in the extracellular matrix (ECM) affect the proliferation and the expressions of angiogenesis-related growth factors and cytokines in the trophoblasts. 3A-Sub-E trophoblastic cells cultured in high glucose medium were conducted to mimic the hyperglycemic condition. Results showed that the hyperglycemia-induced GAG alterations in the cell surface perlecan as well as in the ECM indeed upregulated the expressions of IL-6, IL-8, and MCP-1 and the activities of MMP-2 and MMP-9 and downregulated the expressions of TIMP-2. A regulatory molecular mechanism of hyperglycemia-induced alterations of the cell surface proteoglycans and the ECM remodeling on the expressions of angiogenesis-related cytokines and growth factors in trophoblasts was proposed. This mechanism may contribute to the aberrant placental structure and the maternal and fetal complications during development.<newchar><newabs>26081199<newchar>Gliomas are highly invasive forms of brain cancer comprising more than 50% of brain tumor cases in adults, and astrocytomas account for ∼60-70% of all gliomas. As a result of multiple factors, including enhanced migratory properties and extracellular matrix remodeling, even with current standards of care, mean survival time for patients is only ∼12 months. Because glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells arise from astrocytes, there is great interest in elucidating the interactions of these two cell types in vivo. Previous work performed on two-dimensional assays (i.e., tissue culture plastic and Boyden chamber assays) utilizes substrates that lack the complexities of the natural microenvironment. Here, we employed a three-dimensional, electrospun poly-(caprolactone) (PCL) nanofiber system (NFS) to mimic some features of topographical properties evidenced in vivo. Co-cultures of human GBM cells and rat astrocytes, as performed on the NFS, showed a significant increase in astrocyte GFAP expression, particularly in the presence of extracellular matrix (ECM) deposited by GBM cells. In addition, GBM migration increased in the presence of astrocytes or soluble factors (i.e., conditioned media). However, the presence of fixed astrocytes acted as an antagonist, lowering GBM migration rates. This data suggests that astrocytes and GBM cells interact through a multitude of pathways, including soluble factors and direct contact. This work demonstrates the potential of the NFS to duplicate some topographical features of the GBM tumor microenvironment, permitting analysis of topographical effects in GBM migration.<newchar>astrocyte<n-term>co-culture<n-term>glial fibrillary acidic protein<n-term>glioblastoma<n-term>glioblastoma multiforme<n-term>migration<n-term>nanofiber<n-term>poly(caprolactone)<n-term><newabs>16253214<newchar>The concept of myocardial remodeling links an initial pathological insult to a progressive geometric change of the ventricle. Currently, our concepts of the remodeling process have evolved to include not only changes in ventricular size and shape, but cellular and molecular remodeling, particularly as the ventricle evolves towards failure. In recent years, much attention has focused on the role of cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) connections in this process. In this review, we will specifically delineate how cell membrane-linked molecules of three classes: integrins, membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases, and ADAMs (A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase) might play crucial roles in myocardial remodeling. These molecules are essential for cell-ECM adhesion, cell signaling, matrix modification, and proteolysis of surface receptors. Our goal is to put forth concepts on how they might interrelate to modulate the remodeling process in the heart.<newchar><newabs>24899409<newchar>Pathological scars, namely, keloids and hypertrophic scars (HSs), are caused by excessive cutaneous wound healing that is characterized by histological extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation, clinically relevant irritating symptoms, and frequent recurrence after surgical excision. To date, there are few effective and specific treatments. This partly reflects the poor understanding of the etiology of these scars and the lack of a suitable animal model. Systemic hypertension has been suggested to participate in pathological scarring. The evidence that supports this hypothesis is reviewed here. Thus, hypertension associates with changes that resemble the aberrant cutaneous wound-healing phases that characterize pathological scar development. It also associates with profibrotic functional changes in the cells that constitute keloids and HSs (endothelial cells, pericytes/myofibroblasts, dermal fibroblasts, and mast cells) and profibrotic ECM remodeling. These hypertension-associated changes are mediated to some extent by inflammation, hypoxia, and the angiotensin/renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Thus, hypertension may be an aggravating/risk factor for keloids and HSs. This will help to identify patients who are prone to heavy scars after surgery or postsurgical recurrence. Moreover, pharmacological agents for the prophylaxis and treatment of hypertension-induced fibrosis in other organs may also be useful for keloids/HSs.<newchar><newabs>16306453<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is critical for all aspects of vascular biology. In concert with supporting cells, endothelial cells (ECs) assemble a laminin-rich basement membrane matrix that provides structural and organizational stability. During the onset of angiogenesis, this basement membrane matrix is degraded by proteinases, among which membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs) are particularly significant. As angiogenesis proceeds, ECM serves essential functions in supporting key signaling events involved in regulating EC migration, invasion, proliferation, and survival. Moreover, the provisional ECM serves as a pliable scaffold wherein mechanical guidance forces are established among distal ECs, thereby providing organizational cues in the absence of cell-cell contact. Finally, through specific integrin-dependent signal transduction pathways, ECM controls the EC cytoskeleton to orchestrate the complex process of vascular morphogenesis by which proliferating ECs organize into multicellular tubes with functional lumens. Thus, the composition of ECM and therefore the regulation of ECM degradation and remodeling serves pivotally in the control of lumen and tube formation and, finally, neovessel stability and maturation.<newchar><newabs>26816843<newchar>Chronic inflammation contributes to the onset and progression of human cancer, via modifications in the tumor microenvironment by remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) and initiating epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). At the biological level, chronically inflamed cells release cytokines that are functionally dictating a constitutively active stroma, promoting tumor growth and metastasis. In prostate cancer, inflammation correlates with increased development of &quot;risk factor&quot; lesions or proliferative inflammatory atrophy (PIA). Chronic inflammation in benign prostate biopsy specimens can be associated with high-grade prostate tumors in adjacent areas. In this article, we discuss the current understanding of the incidence of inflammation in prostate cancer progression and the significance of the process in therapeutic targeting of specific inflammatory signaling pathways and critical effectors during tumor progression. Further understanding of the process of chronic inflammation in prostate tumor progression to metastasis will enable development and optimization of novel therapeutic modalities for the treatment of high-risk patients with advanced disease.<newchar>Prostate cancer<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>biomarkers<n-term>metastasis<n-term>therapy<n-term><newabs>23999154<newchar>In the adult central nervous system (CNS) subsets of neurons are enwrapped by densely organized extracellular matrix structures, called perineuronal nets (PNNs). PNNs are formed at the end of critical periods and contribute to synapse stabilization. Enzymatic degradation of PNNs or genetic deletion of specific PNN components leads to the prolongation of the plasticity period. PNNs consist of extracellular matrix molecules, including chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, hyaluronan, tenascins and link proteins. It has been recently shown that the chemorepulsive axon guidance protein semaphorin3A (Sema3A) is also a constituent of PNNs, binding with high affinity to the sugar chains of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. To elucidate whether the expression of Sema3A is modified in parallel with structural plasticity in the adult CNS, we examined Sema3A expression in the deep cerebellar nuclei of the adult mouse in a number of conditions associated with structural reorganization of the local connectivity. We found that Sema3A in PNNs is reduced during enhanced neuritic remodeling, in both physiological and injury-induced conditions. Moreover, we provide evidence that Sema3A is tightly associated with Purkinje axons and their terminals and its amount in the PNNs is related to Purkinje cell innervation of DCN neurons, but not to glutamatergic inputs. On the whole these data suggest that Sema3A may contribute to the growth-inhibitory properties of PNNs and Purkinje neurons may directly control their specific connection pattern through the release and capture of this guidance cue in the specialized ECM that surrounds their terminals.<newchar>CSPG<n-term>Cartilage link protein-1<n-term>Cerebellum<n-term>DCN<n-term>ECM<n-term>Enriched environment<n-term>GAP-43<n-term>PC<n-term>PI<n-term>PNN<n-term>Perineuronal net<n-term>Plasticity<n-term>Purkinje cell<n-term>Sema3A<n-term>TG<n-term>WFA<n-term>WT<n-term>Wisteria floribunda agglutinin<n-term>chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan<n-term>deep cerebellar nuclei<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>perineuronal net<n-term>propidium iodidie<n-term>semaphorin3A<n-term>transgenic<n-term>wild-type<n-term><newabs>22885638<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts (CF) play a pivotal role in the repair and remodeling of the heart that occur following myocardial infarction (MI). The transition through the inflammatory, granulation and maturation phases of infarct healing is driven by cellular responses to local levels of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors that fluctuate in a temporal and spatial manner. In the acute inflammatory phase early after MI, CF contribute to the inflammatory milieu through increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and they promote extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation by increasing matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activity. In the granulation phase, CF migrate into the infarct zone, proliferate and produce MMPs and pro-angiogenic molecules to facilitate revascularization. Fibroblasts also undergo a phenotypic change to become myofibroblasts. In the maturation phase, inflammation is reduced by anti-inflammatory cytokines, and increased levels of profibrotic stimuli induce myofibroblasts to synthesize new ECM to form a scar. The scar is contracted through the mechanical force generated by myofibroblasts, preventing cardiac dilation. In this review we discuss the transition from myocardial inflammation to fibrosis with particular focus on how CF respond to alterations in proinflammatory and profibrotic signals. By furthering our understanding of these events, it is hoped that new therapeutic interventions will be developed that selectively reduce adverse myocardial remodeling post-MI, while sparing essential repair mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>16107765<newchar>Increasing evidence indicates that airway remodeling plays an important part in asthma pathogenesis. However, mechanisms underlying airway remodeling are not yet fully elucidated. Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 is the main inhibitor of the fibrinolytic system and is known to play an essential role in tissue remodeling. Recent evidence indicates that chronic asthma may lead to tissue remodeling such as subepithelial fibrosis and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the airways. Recently, the mast cell (MC), which plays a major role in asthma, is found as a novel source of PAI-1 and a large number of MCs expressing PAI-1 are infiltrated in the airways of patients with severe asthma. Furthermore, PAI-1-deficient mice show reduced ECM deposition in the airways of a murine model of chronic asthma. In a human study, the 4G allele frequency was significantly higher in the asthmatic patients than in the control group. In view of the findings that the 4G allele is associated with elevated plasma PAI-1 level, elevated PAI-1 level in the lung may contribute to the development of airway remodeling. In summary, MCs may play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma in part by producing PAI-1. Further studies evaluating the mechanisms of PAI-1 action may provide a new paradigm in airway remodeling and lead to the development of a novel therapeutic target.<newchar><newabs>24356935<newchar>In order to improve bone regeneration, development and evaluation of new adaptive biomaterials is warranted. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) such as hyaluronan (HA) and chondroitin sulfate (CS) are major extracellular matrix (ECM) components of bone, and display osteogenic properties that are potentially useful for biomaterial applications. Using native and synthetic sulfate-modified GAGs, we manufactured artificial collagen/GAG ECM (aECMs) coatings, and evaluated how the presence of GAGs and their degree of sulfation affects the differentiation of murine mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts (OB) cultivated on these aECMs. GAG sulfation regulated osteogenesis at all key steps of OB development. Adhesion, but not migration, was diminished by 50% (P &lt; 0.001). Proliferation and metabolic activity were slightly (P &lt; 0.05) and cell death events strongly (P &lt; 0.001) down-regulated due to a switch from proliferative to matrix synthesis state. When exposed to sulfated GAGs, OB marker genes, such as alkaline phosphatase, osteoprotegerin (OPG), and osteocalcin increased by up to 28-fold (P &lt; 0.05) and calcium deposition up to 4-fold (P &lt; 0.05). Furthermore, GAG treatment of OBs suppressed their ability to support osteoclast (OC) differentiation and resorption. In conclusion, GAG sulfation controls bone cell homeostasis by concurrently promoting osteogenesis and suppressing their paracrine support of OC functions, thus displaying a favorable profile on bone remodeling. Whether these cellular properties translate into improved bone regeneration needs to be validated in vivo.<newchar>CHONDROITIN SULFATE (CS)<n-term>GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS (GAG)<n-term>HYALURONIC ACID/HYALURONAN (HA) SULFATE<n-term>OSTEOBLASTS (OB)<n-term>OSTEOCLASTS (OC)<n-term><newabs>24679493<newchar>The purpose of this study is to demonstrate scarless vocal fold (VF) regeneration by using a composite gel composed of small intestine submucosa (SIS) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). A scar was made with an electrocoagulator on both VFs in 24 rabbits, followed by injection of either MSCs, SIS, or MSCs-SIS composite gel in the right side VF, while the left side VF was left untreated. VF scars were evaluated with in vivo fluorescence live imaging system (IFLIS), endoscopy, histology, and videokymography (VKG) after eight weeks. IFLIS demonstrated that SIS enabled the MSCs to survive and be engrafted in the VF. The histological analysis showed increased hyaluronic acid accumulation and controlled collagen deposition by MSCs-SIS composite gel. VKG analysis showed more favorable vibrations of MSCs-SIS injected VF, compared to other treatment group. In conclusion, the injectable SIS supplied a niche for the MSCs to stably settle down in scarred VFs and helped to regulate ECM synthesis. The ECM remodeling underwent by the surviving MSCs eventually led to the functional improvement of the VF. The results of the present investigation suggest that SIS-MSCs composite gel is a plausible biomaterial for prolonged survival of MSCs in VFs and promotes scarless VF healing.<newchar>Extracellular matrix<n-term>In vivo fluorescence live imaging system<n-term>Mesenchymal stem cells<n-term>Small intestine submucosa<n-term>Vocal fold<n-term>Wound healing<n-term><newabs>24386310<newchar>COPD induced following biomass smoke exposure has been reported to be associated with a more fibrotic phenotype than cigarette smoke induced COPD. This study aimed to investigate if biomass smoke induced extracellular matrix (ECM) protein production from primary human lung fibroblasts in vitro. Primary human lung fibroblasts (n=5-10) were stimulated in vitro for up to 72 hours with increasing concentrations of biomass smoke extract (BME) or cigarette smoke extract (CSE) prior to being assessed for deposition of ECM proteins, cytokine release, and activation of intracellular signalling molecules. Deposition of the ECM proteins perlecan and fibronectin was upregulated by both CSE (p&lt;0.05) and BME (p&lt;0.05). The release of the neutrophilic chemokine IL-8 was also enhanced by BME. ERK1/2 phosphorylation was significantly upregulated by BME (p&lt;0.05). Chemical inhibition of ERK signalling molecules partially attenuated these effects (p&lt;0.05). Stimulation with endotoxin had no effect. This study demonstrated that BME had similar effects to CSE in vitro and had the capacity to directly induce fibrosis by upregulating production of ECM proteins. The mechanisms by which both biomass and cigarette smoke exposure cause lung damage may be similar.<newchar><newabs>24453182<newchar>Tissue engineered heart valves (TEHV) can be useful in the repair of congenital or acquired valvular diseases due to their potential for growth and remodeling. The development of biomimetic scaffolds is a major challenge in heart valve tissue engineering. One of the most important structural characteristics of mature heart valve leaflets is their intrinsic anisotropy, which is derived from the microstructure of aligned collagen fibers in the extracellular matrix (ECM). In the present study, a directional electrospinning technique is used to fabricate fibrous poly(glycerol sebacate):poly(caprolactone) (PGS:PCL) scaffolds containing aligned fibers, which resemble native heart valve leaflet ECM networks. In addition, the anisotropic mechanical characteristics of fabricated scaffolds are tuned by changing the ratio of PGS:PCL to mimic the native heart valve's mechanical properties. Primary human valvular interstitial cells (VICs) attach and align along the anisotropic axes of all PGS:PCL scaffolds with various mechanical properties. The cells are also biochemically active in producing heart-valve-associated collagen, vimentin, and smooth muscle actin as determined by gene expression. The fibrous PGS:PCL scaffolds seeded with human VICs mimick the structure and mechanical properties of native valve leaflet tissues and would potentially be suitable for the replacement of heart valves in diverse patient populations.<newchar>aortic valve<n-term>electrospinning<n-term>human valvular interstitial cells<n-term>mechanical properties<n-term>tissue engineered heart valve<n-term><newabs>24700411<newchar>Tendon injuries occur frequently in physically active individuals, but the clinical outcomes for these injuries can be poor. In many injured tissues the repair process is orchestrated by two types of cells, macrophages and fibroblasts. Macrophages, which have both pro-inflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) phenotypes, can directly participate in tissue remodeling and direct the response of other cells through the secretion of cytokines and growth factors. In many organ systems, epithelial cells can trans-differentiate into fibroblasts, which can then regenerate damaged ECM. This process is triggered via activation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signaling programs. Most tendons are surrounded by sheets of epithelial cells, and these tissue layers could provide a source of fibroblasts to repair injured tendons. To gain greater insight into the biology of tendon repair, we performed a tenotomy and repair in Achilles tendons of adult rats and determined changes in macrophage phenotype, and ECM- and EMT-related genes over a 4-week time course. The results from this study suggest that changes in macrophage phenotype and activation of EMT-related programs likely contribute to the degradation and subsequent repair of injured tendon tissue.<newchar>epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>macrophage<n-term>repair<n-term>tendon<n-term><newabs>23144462<newchar>Aortic aneurysm is dilation of the aorta primarily due to degradation of the aortic wall extracellular matrix (ECM). Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) inhibit matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), the proteases that degrade the ECM. Timp3 is the only ECM-bound Timp, and its levels are altered in the aorta from patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). We investigated the causal role of Timp3 in AAA formation. Infusion of angiotensin II (Ang II) using micro-osmotic (Alzet) pumps in Timp3(-/-) male mice, but not in wild type control mice, led to adverse remodeling of the abdominal aorta, reduced collagen and elastin proteins but not mRNA, and elevated proteolytic activities, suggesting excess protein degradation within 2 weeks that led to formation of AAA by 4 weeks. Intriguingly, despite early up-regulation of MMP2 in Timp3(-/-)Ang II aortas, additional deletion of Mmp2 in these mice (Timp3(-/-)/Mmp2(-/-)) resulted in exacerbated AAA, compromised survival due to aortic rupture, and inflammation in the abdominal aorta. Reconstitution of WT bone marrow in Timp3(-/-)/Mmp2(-/-) mice reduced inflammation and prevented AAA in these animals following Ang II infusion. Treatment with a broad spectrum MMP inhibitor (PD166793) prevented the Ang II-induced AAA in Timp3(-/-) and Timp3(-/-)/Mmp2(-/-) mice. Our study demonstrates that the regulatory function of TIMP3 is critical in preventing adverse vascular remodeling and AAA. Hence, replenishing TIMP3, a physiological inhibitor of a number of metalloproteinases, could serve as a therapeutic approach in limiting AAA development or expansion.<newchar><newabs>17587755<newchar>Aldosterone antagonists have been reported to prevent ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI) via their action to extracellular matrix (ECM). However, it remains largely unknown whether aldosterone antagonists attenuate myocyte loss in the remodeling process. The present study examined whether spironolactone prevents myocyte apoptosis and improves post-infarct ventricular remodeling in rats. MI was achieved by permanent occlusion of the left coronary artery. Administration of spironolactone (100 mg/kg/day) was started immediately after MI. Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: 1) sham, 2) spironolactone-treated sham, 3) untreated MI, 4) spironolactone-treated MI. Echocardiographic parameters (left ventricular [LV] diastolic dimension [LVDd], fractional shortening [%FS]), hemodynamic parameters (LV systolic pressure [LVSP], LV end-diastolic pressure [LVEDP], dP/dt(max) and dP/dt(min)) and collagen accumulation quantitated by Masson's Trichrome staining were significantly improved in the spironolactone-treated MI group on the 14th day, compared with the untreated MI group. Moreover, the percentage of apoptotic myocytes evaluated by terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was significantly lower in the spironolactone-treated MI group on the 2nd (3.54% vs. 5.79% in untreated MI group), 7th (0.65% vs. 1.37% in untreated MI group) and 14th days (0.11% vs. 0.16% in untreated MI group). Real time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis showed that the expression of mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) mRNA and that of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 (11beta-HSD2) mRNA, which is known to confer aldosterone selectivity on MR, were upregulated in the untreated MI group, and that spironolactone significantly suppressed the expression of these genes. Moreover, spironolactone significantly inhibited aldosterone-induced apoptosis in cultured rat cardiac myocytes in a dose-dependent fashion. Our study demonstrates that, in addition to their effect on ECM, aldosterone antagonists inhibit myocyte apoptosis and prevent post-infarct ventricular remodeling by modulating the expression levels of MR and 11beta-HSD2, which are enhanced in the remodeling heart.<newchar><newabs>21989018<newchar>Skeletal growth by endochondral ossification involves tightly coordinated chondrocyte differentiation that creates reserve, proliferating, prehypertrophic, and hypertrophic cartilage zones in the growth plate. Many human skeletal disorders result from mutations in cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) components that compromise both ECM architecture and chondrocyte function. Understanding normal cartilage development, composition, and structure is therefore vital to unravel these disease mechanisms. To study this intricate process in vivo by proteomics, we analyzed mouse femoral head cartilage at developmental stages enriched in either immature chondrocytes or maturing/hypertrophic chondrocytes (post-natal days 3 and 21, respectively). Using LTQ-Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 703 cartilage proteins. Differentially abundant proteins (q &lt; 0.01) included prototypic markers for both early and late chondrocyte differentiation (epiphycan and collagen X, respectively) and novel ECM and cell adhesion proteins with no previously described roles in cartilage development (tenascin X, vitrin, Urb, emilin-1, and the sushi repeat-containing proteins SRPX and SRPX2). Meta-analysis of cartilage development in vivo and an in vitro chondrocyte culture model (Wilson, R., Diseberg, A. F., Gordon, L., Zivkovic, S., Tatarczuch, L., Mackie, E. J., Gorman, J. J., and Bateman, J. F. (2010) Comprehensive profiling of cartilage extracellular matrix formation and maturation using sequential extraction and label-free quantitative proteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 9, 1296-1313) identified components involved in both systems, such as Urb, and components with specific roles in vivo, including vitrin and CILP-2 (cartilage intermediate layer protein-2). Immunolocalization of Urb, vitrin, and CILP-2 indicated specific roles at different maturation stages. In addition to ECM-related changes, we provide the first biochemical evidence of changing endoplasmic reticulum function during cartilage development. Although the multifunctional chaperone BiP was not differentially expressed, enzymes and chaperones required specifically for collagen biosynthesis, such as the prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1, cartilage-associated protein, and peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase B complex, were down-regulated during maturation. Conversely, the lumenal proteins calumenin, reticulocalbin-1, and reticulocalbin-2 were significantly increased, signifying a shift toward calcium binding functions. This first proteomic analysis of cartilage development in vivo reveals the breadth of protein expression changes during chondrocyte maturation and ECM remodeling in the mouse femoral head.<newchar><newabs>14523040<newchar>Eosinophil-derived TGF-beta has been implicated in remodeling events in asthma. We hypothesized that reduction of bronchial mucosal eosinophils with anti-IL-5 would reduce markers of airway remodeling. Bronchial biopsies were obtained before and after three infusions of a humanized, anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody (mepolizumab) in 24 atopic asthmatics in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The thickness and density of tenascin, lumican, and procollagen III in the reticular basement membrane (RBM) were quantified immunohistochemically by confocal microscopy. Expression of TGF-beta1 mRNA by airway eosinophils was assessed by in situ hybridization, and TGF-beta1 protein was measured in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid by ELISA. At baseline, airway eosinophil infiltration and ECM protein deposition was increased in the RBM of asthmatics compared with nonasthmatic controls. Treating asthmatics with anti-IL-5 antibody, which specifically decreased airway eosinophil numbers, significantly reduced the expression of tenascin, lumican, and procollagen III in the bronchial mucosal RBM when compared with placebo. In addition, anti-IL-5 treatment was associated with a significant reduction in the numbers and percentage of airway eosinophils expressing mRNA for TGF-beta1 and the concentration of TGF-beta1 in BAL fluid. Therefore eosinophils may contribute to tissue remodeling processes in asthma by regulating the deposition of ECM proteins.<newchar><newabs>21984074<newchar>Significant increases in skin wound healing rates occur by reducing connexin-mediated communication (CMC). Gap27, a connexin (Cx) mimetic peptide targeted to the second extracellular loop of Cx43, which inhibits CMC, increases migration of human keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. To examine the efficacy of Gap27 in a hyperglycemic and hyperinsulinemic in vitro environment, cell migration, gap junction, and Cx hemichannel functionality and cell-substrate adhesion assays were performed on human dermal fibroblasts and diabetic fibroblast and keratinocytes. To investigate fibroblast genes involved in these processes, extra-cellular matrix (ECM) and adhesion gene expression was determined with a PCR array. Gap27 increased fibroblast migration in both euglycemia/euinsulinemia and hyperglycemia/hyperinsulinemia, and influenced migration in diabetic keratinocytes. Hyperglycemia/hyperinsulinemia reduced gap junction coupling in fibroblasts and Gap27 reduced CMC and cell adhesion to substrata in fibroblasts cultured in high glucose. Migrating dermal fibroblast ECM and cell adhesion genes were found to be differentially regulated by Gap27 in euglycemia and hyperglycemia. The PCR array showed that Gap27 upregulated 34 genes and downregulated 1 gene in euglycemic migrating fibroblasts. By contrast in hyperglycemia, Gap27 upregulated 1 gene and downregulated 9 genes. In euglycemic conditions, Gap27 induced upregulation of genes associated with ECM remodeling, whereas in hyperglycemia, ECM component genes were downregulated by Gap27. Thus, Gap27 improves cell migration during scrape-wound repair in hyperglycemia/hyperinsulinemia conditions in vitro, although migration of diabetic cells is less influenced. Our results suggest that this increase in motility may occur by decreasing gap junction and hemichannel activity and altering gene expression in the adhesion and ECM pathway.<newchar><newabs>23284911<newchar>Although the importance of human apolipoprotein E (apoE) in vascular diseases has clearly been established, most of the research on apoE has focused on its role in cholesterol metabolism. In view of the observation that apoE and its functional domains impact extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, we hypothesized that apoE could also confer protection against ECM degradation by mechanisms independent of its role in cholesterol and lipoprotein transport. The ECM degrading enzyme, heparanase, is secreted by cells as pro-heparanase that is internalized through low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1) to become enzymatically active. Both apoE and pro-heparanase bind the LRP-1. We further hypothesized that an apoE mimetic peptide (apoEdp) would inhibit the production of active heparanase by blocking LRP-1-mediated uptake of pro-heparanase and thereby decrease degradation of the ECM. To test this hypothesis, we induced the expression of heparanase by incubating human retinal endothelial cells (hRECs) with high glucose (30 mM) for 72 hours. We found that elevated expression of heparanase by high glucose was associated with increased shedding of heparan sulfate (ΔHS) and the tight junction protein occludin. Treatment of hRECs with 100 µM apoEdp in the presence of high glucose significantly reduced the expression of heparanase, shedding of ΔHS, and loss of occludin as detected by Western blot analysis. Either eye drop treatment of 1% apoEdp topically 4 times a day for 14 consecutive days or intraperitoneal injection (40 mg/kg) of apoEdp daily for 14 consecutive days in an in vivo mouse model of streptozotocin-induced diabetes inhibited the loss of tight junction proteins occludin and zona occludin- 1 (ZO-1). These findings imply a functional relationship between apoE and endothelial cell matrix because the deregulation of these molecules can be inhibited by a short peptide derived from the receptor-binding region of apoE. Thus, strategies targeting ECM-degrading enzymes could be therapeutically beneficial for treating diabetic retinopathy.<newchar><newabs>25749705<newchar>Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a trypsin-like serine protease that plays a vital role in extracellular conversion of inactive plasminogen into catalytically active plasmin. Activated plasmin facilitates the release of several proteolytic enzymes, which control processes like pericellular proteolysis and remodeling of ECM. uPA and the receptor uPAR, are overexpressed in a number of malignant tumours and uPA/uPAR play major roles in adhesion, migration, invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Elevated levels of uPA have been reported as a risk biomarker for disease relapse, increased cancer malignancy and poor survival prognosis. For these reasons uPA is considered an important target for anticancer drug therapy. In this study we isolated two camel single domain antibodies (nanobodies) from a naïve library by phage display. The nanobody sequences were sequence-optimized for Escherichia coli expression, cloned into the pET22-B(+) vector system, expressed in BL-21 cells and purified from the periplasmic fraction by IMAC. ELISA tests demonstrated that the purified nanobodies were specific for uPA when tested towards other trypsin-like serine proteases. The apparent affinities of the nanobodies were determined by competitive ELISA to 80 nM and 522 nM, respectively. The best binder did not inhibit uPA (nAb-C3), however the lowest affinity binder (nAb-C8) was able to inhibit the uPA-mediated cleavage of the substrate S-2444. The results validate the naïve library as a resource for retrieval of relevant lead molecules and the novel uPA-nanobodies can be useful pharmacological tools to study uPA structure-function relationships.<newchar>Antibody technology<n-term>Nanobody<n-term>Phage display<n-term>Serine protease<n-term>Single domain antibody<n-term><newabs>23528534<newchar>Emmetropization is a vision dependent mechanism that attempts to minimize refractive error through coordinated growth of the cornea, lens and sclera such that the axial length matches the focal length of the eye. It is generally accepted that this visually guided eye growth is controlled via a cascade of locally generated chemical events that are initiated in the retina and ultimately cause changes in scleral extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling which lead to changes in eye size and refraction. Of much interest, therefore, are the molecular mechanisms that underpin emmetropization and visually guided ocular growth. The choroid, a highly vascularized layer located between the retina and the sclera is uniquely situated to relay retina-derived signals to the sclera to effect changes in ECM synthesis and ocular size. Studies initiated by Josh Wallman clearly demonstrate that the choroid plays an active role in emmetropization, both by modulation of its thickness to adjust the retina to the focal plane of the eye (choroidal accommodation), and well as through the release of growth factors that have the potential to regulate scleral extracellular matrix remodeling. His discoveries prompted numerous investigations on the molecular composition of the choroid and changes in gene expression associated with visually guided ocular growth. This article will review molecular and functional studies of the choroid to provide support for the hypothesis that the choroid is a source of sclera growth regulators that effect changes in ocular growth in response to visual stimuli.<newchar>choroid<n-term>emmetropization<n-term>myopia<n-term>sclera<n-term><newabs>25168834<newchar>It is well known that progression of chronic kidney disease can be ameliorated or stabilized by different interventions, but more studies indicate that it can even be reversed. Most data suggest that current therapy, especially renin-angiotensin system inhibition alone, is not sufficient to initiate and maintain long-term regression of glomerular structural injury. In this article, we review the potential reversal of glomerulosclerosis and evidence from both human and animal studies. We discuss mechanisms that involve matrix remodeling, capillary reorganization, and podocyte reconstitution. In the future, a multipronged strategy including novel anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic molecules should be considered to potentiate regression of glomerulosclerosis.<newchar>Capillary<n-term>ECM<n-term>Glomerulosclerosis<n-term>Podocyte<n-term>Regression<n-term><newabs>24291496<newchar>Progressive interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (IF/TA) is a leading cause of chronic allograft dysfunction. Increased extracellular matrix remodeling regulated by matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs) has been implicated in the development of IF/TA. The aim of this study was to investigate whether urinary/serum MMPs/TIMPs correlate with subclinical IF/TA detected in surveillance biopsies within the first 6months post-transplant. We measured eight different MMPs/TIMPs simultaneously in urine and serum samples from patients classified as normal histology (n=15), IF/TA 1 (n=15) and IF/TA 2-3 (n=10). There was no difference in urinary MMPs/TIMPs among the three groups, and only 1/8 serum MMPs/TIMPs (i.e. MMP-1) was significantly elevated in biopsies with IF/TA 2-3 (p=0.01). In addition, urinary/serum MMPs/TIMPs were not different between surveillance biopsies demonstrating an early development of IF/TA (i.e. delta IF/TA≥1 compared to a previous biopsy obtained three months before; n=11) and stable grade of IF/TA (i.e. delta IF/TA=0; n=20). Next, we investigated whether urinary/serum MMP/TIMP levels are elevated during acute subclinical tubulitis in surveillance biopsies obtained within the first 6months post-transplant (n=25). Compared to biopsies with normal histology, serum MMPs/TIMPs were not different; however, all urinary MMP/TIMP levels were numerically higher during subclinical tubulitis (MMP-1, MMP-7, TIMP-1 with p≤0.04). We conclude that urinary/serum MMPs/TIMPs do hardly correlate with existing or early developing IF/TA in surveillance biopsies obtained within the first 6months post-transplant. This could be explained by the dynamic process of extracellular matrix remodeling, which seems to be active during acute tubulo-interstitial injury/inflammation, but not in quiescent IF/TA.<newchar>ECM<n-term>Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy<n-term>MMPs<n-term>Matrix metalloproteases<n-term>Non-invasive monitoring<n-term>PCR<n-term>Renal transplantation<n-term>TGF-beta<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>matrix metalloproteases<n-term>polymerase chain reaction<n-term>tTG<n-term>tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteases<n-term>tissue transglutaminase<n-term>transforming growth factor beta<n-term><newabs>25937317<newchar>The plasminogen (Plg) system plays an important homeostatic role in the degradation of fibrin clots, extracellular matrices and tissue barriers important for cellular migration, as well as the promotion of neurotransmitter release. Plg circulates in plasma at physiologically high concentrations (150-200μg ml(-1)) as an inactive proenzyme. Proteins enriched in lysine and other positively charged residues (histidine and arginine) as well as glycosaminoglycans and gangliosides bind Plg. The binding interaction initiates a structural adjustment to the bound Plg that facilitates cleavage by proteases (plasminogen activators tPA and uPA) that activate Plg to the active serine protease plasmin. Both pathogenic and commensal bacteria capture Plg onto their cell surface and promote its conversion to plasmin. Many microbial Plg-binding proteins have been described underpinning the importance this process plays in how bacteria interact with their hosts. Bacteria exploit the proteolytic capabilities of plasmin by (i) targeting the mammalian fibrinolytic system and degrading fibrin clots, (ii) remodeling the extracellular matrix and generating bioactive cleavage fragments of the ECM that influence signaling pathways, (iii) activating matrix metalloproteinases that assist in the destruction of tissue barriers and promote microbial metastasis and (iv) destroying immune effector molecules. There has been little focus on the exploitation of the fibrinolytic system by veterinary pathogens. Here we describe several pathogens of veterinary significance that possess adhesins that bind plasmin(ogen) onto their cell surface and promote its activation to plasmin. Cumulative data suggests that these attributes provide pathogenic and commensal bacteria with a means to colonize and persist within the host environment.<newchar>Complement<n-term>Invasion<n-term>Moonlighting<n-term>Plasminogen<n-term>Zoonosis<n-term><newabs>21761392<newchar>Ameloblastin (AMBN) is an enamel matrix protein produced by ameloblasts. It has been suggested that AMBN might also be implicated in craniofacial bone formation. Our objective was to determine whether AMBN has an effect on osteogenic mineralisation and influences bone remodelling and repair. MC3T3-E1 cells were screened for endogenous expression of enamel proteins using real time PCR. Various osteogenic cells were infected with lentivirus encoding for AMBN and protein expression was verified using immunochemistry. Cultures were stained with alizarin red and mineralisation was quantified. Healing bone was probed for expression of AMBN by DNA microarray analysis. Tooth extraction, experimental tooth movement (ETM), and creation of a non-critical size bone defect in the tibia (BDT) were carried out in wild type and AMBN(Δ5-6) mutant mice. Tissues were processed for immunolabelling of AMBN and Bril, an osteoblast specific protein associated with active bone formation. MC3T3-E1 cells and healing bone showed no significant expression of AMBN. Overexpression of AMBN in osteogenic cultures induced no noticeable changes in mineralisation. In wild type mice, AMBN was immunodetected in ameloblasts and enamel, but not in normal bone, and at sites where bone remodelling and repair were induced. Bone remodelling during ETM and BDT repair in AMBN(Δ5-6) mice were not significantly different from that in wild type animals. Our results suggest that AMBN does not influence osteogenic activity in vitro under the conditions used, and does not participate in craniofacial bone remodelling under mechanical stress and in repair of non-critical size bone defects.<newchar><newabs>23761625<newchar>Efficient skeletal muscle repair and regeneration require coordinated remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Previous reports have indicated that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play the pivotal role in ECM remodeling during muscle regeneration. The goal of the current study was to determine if the interstitial collagenase MMP-13 was involved in the muscle repair process. Using intramuscular cardiotoxin injections to induce acute muscle injury, we found that MMP-13 expression and activity transiently increased during the regeneration process. In addition, in muscles from mdx mice, which exhibit chronic injury, MMP-13 expression and protein levels were elevated. In differentiating C2C12 cells, a murine myoblast cell line, Mmp13 expression was most pronounced after myoblast fusion and during myotube formation. Using pharmacological inhibition of MMP-13 to test whether MMP-13 activity is necessary for the proliferation, differentiation, migration, and fusion of C2C12 cells, we found a dramatic blockade of myoblast migration, as well as a delay in differentiation. In contrast, C2C12 cells with stable overexpression of MMP-13 showed enhanced migration, without affecting myoblast maturation. Taken together, these results support a primary role for MMP-13 in myoblast migration that leads to secondary effects on differentiation.<newchar>collagenase<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>muscle repair<n-term>myoblast maturation<n-term><newabs>24390105<newchar>There are no effective treatments for fibrosis, an out-of-control wound-healing process in which excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) such as collagen, resulting in significant morbidity and mortality. Endostatin is a natural proteolytic fragment of collagen XVIII, which is known to possess potent antiangiogenic activity. Many clinical trials of endostatin have been conducted for anti-cancer therapy. In addition to antiangiogenic effects, recent studies have revealed that endostatin may suppress aberrant tissue remodeling and scarring. Neutralization of endogenous endostatin in rat myocardial infarction (MI) model worsened the outcomes of MI, indicating that endostatin may have protective role against left ventricular remodeling and heart failure after MI. Recently, we also reported inhibitory effects of peptides derived from endostatin on fibrosis. A peptide derived from the C-terminus of endostatin suppressed ECM production in fibroblasts in the presence of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), prevented TGF-β-induced dermal fibrosis ex vivo in human skin, and ameliorated skin and pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin in vivo. The antifibrotic capacity was accompanied by reduced cell apoptosis and lower levels of lysyl oxidase and early growth response gene-1. Endostation may have the therapeutic potential for inhibiting fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>22323515<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors, candidate therapeutic agents for a number of diseases, are known to be associated with acute fibrosis-type adverse effects in a number of species, including humans. The broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor, AZM551248, has previously been shown to cause these effects in the dog. Changes were characterized by the abnormal and extensive proliferation of fibroblasts and the deposition of collagen particularly in the subcutaneous connective tissues (subcutis) and were termed fibrodysplasia (FD). We performed a time-course study in dogs using AZM551248 and sampled skin, subcutis, and plasma before and during the development of FD. Detailed histopathological analysis and global gene expression profiling were performed on the subcutaneous tissues. The gene expression analysis of the subcutis indicated that extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling was initiated asymptomatically at or before the earliest time point, day 4, and this was associated with dysregulation of expression of a number of MMPs and proteolytic enzymes. At later time points, the FD became progressively more extensive and severe, and this was associated with gene expression changes characteristic of tissue fibrosis, for example those associated with procollagen synthesis and processing. We postulate that AZM551248 inhibition of MMP action within the subcutis modulates the activity of several transcription factors and this in turn upregulates expression of specific proteases which initiate ECM remodeling. Persistent MMP inhibition results in the progression of ECM remodeling, culminating in collagen deposition and overt fibrosis. Our data indicate that inhibition of MMPs 1, 2, 3, and 9 is a key early event in AZM551248-induced FD in dog subcutis.<newchar><newabs>15914295<newchar>Given the lack of a unified theory of heart failure, future research efforts will be required to unify and synthesize our current understanding of the multiple mechanisms that control remodeling in the failing heart. Matrix remodeling and the associated activation of inflammatory cytokines and MMPs have emerged as key pathways in the development of heart failure. As such, attempts to understand the integrated control of ECM homeostasis with the bioactivation of inflammatory cytokines may be of particular relevance to the development of effective anti-remodeling approaches. Notably, the implantation of isolated populations of cells in failing myocardium has a profound and consistent anti-remodeling effect that limits the progression to CHF. These observations were consistently identified in numerous studies using diverse experimental animal models and varied cell types. Accordingly, multicenter clinical trials are underway, and the preliminary data in patients with CHF are encouraging. Despite the enormous promise of cell transplantation to restore and regenerate failing myocardium, the mechanisms underlying these profound biological effects are not understood. An improved understanding of the myocardial response to cell implantation, particularly on parameters of matrix remodeling, may help unify our current understanding of the progression of heart failure and optimize the development of this technique for its evolving therapeutic use. The following review outlines recent advances in medical and surgical approaches to control the remodeling process that underlies the progression of heart failure.<newchar><newabs>23238717<newchar>During early postnatal development of the CNS, neuronal networks are configured through the formation, elimination, and remodeling of dendritic spines, the sites of most excitatory synaptic connections. The closure of this critical period for plasticity correlates with the maturation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and results in reduced dendritic spine dynamics. Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) are thought to be the active components of the mature ECM that inhibit functional plasticity in the adult CNS. These molecules are diffusely expressed in the extracellular space or aggregated as perineuronal nets around specific classes of neurons. We used organotypic hippocampal slices prepared from 6-d-old Thy1-YFP mice and maintained in culture for 4 weeks to allow ECM maturation. We performed live imaging of CA1 pyramidal cells to assess the effect of chondroitinase ABC (ChABC)-mediated digestion of CSPGs on dendritic spine dynamics. We found that CSPG digestion enhanced the motility of dendritic spines and induced the appearance of spine head protrusions in a glutamate receptor-independent manner. These changes were paralleled by the activation of β1-integrins and phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase at synaptic sites, and were prevented by preincubation with a β1-integrin blocking antibody. Interestingly, microinjection of ChABC close to dendritic segments was sufficient to induce spine remodeling, demonstrating that CSPGs located around dendritic spines modulate their dynamics independently of perineuronal nets. This restrictive action of perisynaptic CSPGs in mature neural tissue may account for the therapeutic effects of ChABC in promoting functional recovery in impaired neural circuits.<newchar><newabs>23341900<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a key physiological process that occurs in a number of contexts, including cell migration, and is especially important for cellular form and function in three-dimensional (3D) matrices. However, there have been few attempts to computationally model how cells modify their environment in a manner that accounts for both cellular properties and the architecture of the surrounding ECM. To this end, we have developed and validated a novel model to simulate matrix remodeling that explicitly defines cells in a 3D collagenous matrix. In our simulation, cells can degrade, deposit, or pull on local fibers, depending on the fiber density around each cell. The cells can also move within the 3D matrix. Different cell phenotypes can be modeled by varying key cellular parameters. Using the model we have studied how two model cancer cell lines, of differing invasiveness, modify matrices with varying fiber density in their vicinity by tracking the metric of fraction of matrix occupied by fibers. Our results quantitatively demonstrate that in low density environments, cells deposit more collagen to uniformly increase fibril fraction. On the other hand, in higher density environments, the less invasive model cell line reduced the fibril fraction as compared to the highly invasive phenotype. These results show good qualitative and quantitative agreement with existing experimental literature. Our simulation is therefore able to function as a novel platform to provide new insights into the clinically relevant and physiologically critical process of matrix remodeling by helping identify critical parameters that dictate cellular behavior in complex native-like environments.<newchar><newabs>19922863<newchar>In mammals, proteolytic remodeling of the embryonic extracellular matrix (ECM) controls morphogenesis, but the key players remain elusive. Two recent reports identify new roles for metalloproteinases belonging to the MT-MMP and ADAMTS families in branching morphogenesis and interdigital web regression.<newchar><newabs>17653215<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling with successive tissue fibrosis is a key feature of chronic cardiovascular diseases, including atherosclerosis and restenosis. The atherogenic changes underlying these pathologies result from chronification of an acute repair response towards injurious and inflammatory stimuli. Thereby functional tissue is replaced by excessive ECM deposition. In the kidney, impaired remodeling is a major cause of perivascular, interstitial, and glomerular fibrosis but also a common complication of chronic hypertension. Experimental evidence points to the matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) and their intrinsic inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of MMPs as key mediators of atherogenic and fibrotic pathologies. Mechanistically, a deregulation in ECM turnover tightly correlates with an increased production and release of proinflammatory and profibrotic factors including interleukin-1beta, transforming growth factor beta, angiotensin II, and reactive oxygen species. Unlike these factors the pleiotropic messenger molecule nitric oxide (NO) by acting as the major physiological vasodilator has emerged as one of the most atheroprotective factors. However, under inflammatory conditions NO does acquire proatherogenic and profibrotic properties thereby exacerbating tissue fibrosis. In this review, the mechanisms underlying both opposing properties of NO on perivascular ECM remodeling will exemplarily be discussed for renal fibrosis with a particular focus on the MMPs and intrinsic protease inhibitors.<newchar><newabs>11538547<newchar>The differentiaton of bone cells is a complex multistep process. Bone is somewhat unusual in that it is very actively and continually remodeled in the adult and that maintenance of its mass in the mature organism is exquisitely sensitive to mechanical as well as chemical signals. Bone is also unique because it consists of a very large amount of extracellular matrix (ECM) that is mineralized. The integrin family of ECM receptors has been shown to play an important role in tissue morphogenesis in several systems. Our studies on the regulation of matrix remodeling enzymes by integrins in rabbit synovial fibroblasts show that two b1 integrin fibronectin (FN) receptor complexes (alpha 5 beta 1 and alpha 4 beta 1) cooperate in detecting subtle changes in the composition of the ECM. As a result of signal transduction by these integrins, the levels of mRNA and protein for several members of the metalloproteinase family are regulated in these cells. We have also used antibody and RGD peptide perturbation studies to determine the significance of cell/ECM interactions to normal osteogenesis. We found that interactions between the cell binding domain of FN and integrins are required for both normal morphogenesis and gene expression in cultured osteoblasts that differentiate to form bone-like tissue in culture. These data lead us to propose that beta 1 integrins play an important role in osteoblast differentiation as well as in bone remodeling.<newchar>NASA Discipline Musculoskeletal<n-term>NASA Discipline Number 26-10<n-term>NASA Program Space Physiology and Countermeasures<n-term>Non-NASA Center<n-term><newabs>16799088<newchar>Airway and lung tissue remodeling and fibrosis play an important role in the development of symptoms associated with lung function loss in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In the past decades, much attention has been paid to the inflammatory cellular process involved in airway remodeling in these two diseases. However, it is increasingly clear that resident cells contribute to airway and lung tissue remodeling and to associated fibrosis as well. This article deals with some new aspects and discusses the role of vasculature and vascular endothelial growth factor in the development of airway obstruction and airway wall fibrosis in asthma and COPD. Moreover, it addresses the extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover as present in both asthma and COPD. All components of lung ECM (collagen, elastic fibers, proteoglycans) have been shown to be potentially altered in these two diseases. Finally, the interaction between transforming growth factor (TGF), Smad signaling, and TGF in the ECM turnover will be discussed. We propose that ECM damage and repair contribute to airway and lung tissue pathology and that the vasculature may enhance this process. The localization of this process is dependent on the etiology of the disease (i.e., allergen-driven in asthma and smoke-driven in COPD) and the local environment in which the pathologic process takes place.<newchar><newabs>24472826<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) is a dynamic structure, adapting to physiological and pathological stresses placed on the myocardium. Deposition and organization of the matrix fall under the purview of cardiac fibroblasts. While often overlooked compared to myocytes, fibroblasts play a critical role in maintaining ECM homeostasis under normal conditions and in response to pathological stimuli assume an activated, myofibroblast phenotype associated with excessive collagen accumulation contributing to impaired cardiac function. Complete appreciation of fibroblast function is hampered by the lack of fibroblast-specific reagents and the heterogeneity of fibroblast precursors. This is further complicated by our ability to dissect the role of myofibroblasts versus fibroblasts in myocardial in remodeling. This review highlights critical points in the regulation of collagen deposition by fibroblasts, the current panel of molecular tools used to identify fibroblasts and the role of fibroblast-matrix interactions in fibroblast function and differentiation into the myofibroblast phenotype. The clinical potential of exploiting differences between fibroblasts and myofibroblasts and using them to target specific fibroblast populations is also discussed. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled &quot;Myocyte-Fibroblast Signalling in Myocardium.&quot;<newchar>Discoidin Domain Receptor<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibroblast<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Myofibroblast<n-term>Transformation<n-term><newabs>16738205<newchar>Pulmonary fibrosis, the final result of a large variety of interstitial lung diseases, is characterized by an aberrant remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) with a profound disturbance of the normal lung architecture. This remodeling includes the exaggerated accumulation of ECM components in the interstitial and alveolar spaces and the disruption of the basement membranes. It has long been accepted that matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) play an important role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis, but the exact mechanisms are not well characterized. Several MMPs are strongly up-regulated in human and experimental lung fibrosis, highlighting the dynamic nature of scarring within the lung. MMPs are collectively capable of cleaving all components of the ECM and basement membranes, but importantly, they also process bioactive mediators such as growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and cell-surface receptors. Moreover, they participate in the initiation of proteinase cascades that impact much broader substrates. Consequently, MMPs may play a central role in several interrelated processes observed in fibrosis such as ECM remodeling, basement-membrane breakdown, epithelial-cell apoptosis, cell migration, and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21566336<newchar>Neurocan is a central nervous tissue-specific chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan of the lectican family. Mainly expressed during modeling and remodeling stages of this tissue, it is thought to play an important role via binding to various extracellular matrix and cellular components. In adults, neurocan expression is associated with the perineuronal net structures. This study shows the neurocan immunolocalization at the node of Ranvier in mouse central nervous tissues. The N-terminal fragment of neurocan (Ncan130) was the predominant form detected in the optic nerve. The expression of neurocan in the white matter of brain tissue and nerve tracts revealed differential expression profiles compared with those of versican V2 and brevican, other perinodal extracellular matrix molecules. Double immunolabeling for neurocan and a nodal marker, Bral1, or a paranodal marker, caspr, demonstrated that neurocan was localized at the node of Ranvier. Neurocan expression was found at many--not all--nodal regions, and neurocan-positive nodes outnumbered brevican-positive nodes. The nodal localization of neurocan was diminished in Bral1-deficient mice. Taken together, these findings indicate that neurocan contributes to the molecular heterogeneity of the perinodal matrix, and its nodal expression is dependent on Bral1.<newchar><newabs>23262218<newchar>Dermatopontin (DPT), an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, has been previously shown to be upregulated in the infarct zone of experimentally induced myocardial infarction (MI) rats. However, the accurate role that DPT exerts in the ventricular remodeling process after MI remains poorly understood. In this study, we evaluated the expression pattern of DPT mRNA and protein as well as its secretion in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (CMs) and cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) under conditions of hypoxia and serum deprivation (hypoxia/SD). Further, we tested the possible roles of DPT in CFs adhesion, spreading, migration and proliferation, which greatly promote the ventricular remodeling process after MI. Results showed that hypoxia/SD stimulated DPT expression and secretion in CMs and CFs and that DPT promoted adhesion, spreading and migration of CFs whereas had no effect on CFs proliferation. In addition, functional blocking antibodies specific for integrin α3 and β1 significantly reduced CFs adhesion and migration that DPT induced, suggesting that integrin α3β1 is at least one receptor for CFs adhesion and migration to DPT. These results implicated that DPT participates in the ventricular remodeling process after MI and may act as a potential therapeutic target for ventricular remodeling.<newchar><newabs>18178662<newchar>Recent studies have identified extracellular matrix (ECM) compliance as an influential factor in determining the fate of anchorage-dependent cells. We explore a method of examining the influence of ECM compliance on cell morphology and remodeling in three-dimensional culture. For this purpose, a biological ECM analog material was developed to pseudo-independently alter its biochemical and physical properties. A set of 18 material variants were prepared with shear modulus ranging from 10 to 700 Pa. Smooth muscle cells were encapsulated in these materials and time-lapse video microscopy was used to show a relationship between matrix modulus, proteolytic biodegradation, cell spreading, and cell compaction of the matrix. The proteolytic susceptibility of the matrix, the degree of matrix compaction, and the cell morphology were quantified for each of the material variants to correlate with the modulus data. The initial cell spreading into the hydrogel matrix was dependent on the proteolytic susceptibility of the materials, whereas the extent of cell compaction proved to be more correlated to the modulus of the material. Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases profoundly affected initial cell spreading and remodeling even in the most compliant materials. We concluded that smooth muscle cells use proteolysis to form lamellipodia and tractional forces to contract and remodel their surrounding microenvironment. Matrix modulus can therefore be used to control the extent of cellular remodeling and compaction. This study further shows that the interconnection between matrix modulus and proteolytic resistance in the ECM may be partly uncoupled to provide insight into how cells interpret their physical three-dimensional microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>25909286<newchar>Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1) is an endogenous inhibitor for MMPs that regulates the remodeling and turnover of the ECM during normal development and pathological conditions. Intriguingly, recent studies have shown that TIMP-1 plays a dual role in cancer progression. In this study, we found that TIMP-1 expression in HCC tissues is associated with advanced TNM stage, intrahepatic metastasis, portal vein invasion, and vasculature invasion. Notably, TIMP-1 expression in HCC tissue is significantly related to worse overall survival for patients with HCC after liver resection. Ectopic TIMP1 expression promoted the growth of HCC xenografts in nude mice. Both co-culture with Huh7 cells with a high level of TIMP-1 and TIMP1 treatment resulted in up-regulation of hallmarks of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and accelerated cell proliferation, migration and invasion in immortalized liver fibroblasts (LFs) isolated from human normal liver tissue. By co-culture with CAFs, SDF-1/CXCR4/PI3K/AKT signaling was activated and apoptosis was markedly repressed with an increased Bcl-2/BAX ratio in Huh7 cells. Taken together, our observations suggest that TIMP-1 induces the trans-differentiation of LFs into CAFs, suppresses apoptosis via SDF-1/CXCR4/PI3K/AKT signaling and then promotes HCC progression. This protein may be a potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC.<newchar>CAFs<n-term>HCC<n-term>TIMP-1<n-term>apoptosis<n-term>tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>22595522<newchar>Filamins are an important family of actin-binding proteins that, in addition to bundling actin filaments, link cell surface adhesion proteins, signaling receptors and channels to the actin cytoskeleton, and serve as scaffolds for an array of intracellular signaling proteins. Filamins are known to regulate the actin cytoskeleton, act as mechanosensors that modulate tissue responses to matrix density, control cell motility and inhibit activation of integrin adhesion receptors. In this study, we extend the repertoire of filamin activities to include control of extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation. We show that knockdown of filamin increases matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and induces MMP2 activation, enhancing the ability of cells to remodel the ECM and increasing their invasive potential, without significantly altering two-dimensional random cell migration. We further show that within filamin A, the actin-binding domain is necessary, but not sufficient, to suppress the ECM degradation seen in filamin-A-knockdown cells and that dimerization and integrin binding are not required. Filamin mutations are associated with neuronal migration disorders and a range of congenital malformations characterized by skeletal dysplasia and various combinations of cardiac, craniofacial and intestinal anomalies. Furthermore, in breast cancers loss of filamin A has been correlated with increased metastatic potential. Our data suggest that effects on ECM remodeling and cell invasion should be considered when attempting to provide cellular explanations for the physiological and pathological effects of altered filamin expression or filamin mutations.<newchar><newabs>25725553<newchar>The inability to vascularize engineered organs and revascularize areas of infarction has been a major roadblock to delivering successful regenerative medicine therapies to the clinic. These investigations detail an isolated human extracellular matrix derived from the placenta (hPM) that induces vasculogenesis in vitro and angiogenesis in vivo within bioengineered tissues, with significant immune reductive properties. Compositional analysis showed ECM components (fibrinogen, laminin), angiogenic cytokines (angiogenin, FGF), and immune-related cytokines (annexins, DEFA1) in near physiological ratios. Gene expression profiles of endothelial cells seeded onto the matrix displayed upregulation of angiogenic genes (TGFB1, VEGFA), remodeling genes (MMP9, LAMA5) and vascular development genes (HAND2, LECT1). Angiogenic networks displayed a time dependent stability in comparison to current in vitro approaches that degrade rapidly. In vivo, matrix-dosed bioscaffolds showed enhanced angiogenesis and significantly reduced fibrosis in comparison to current angiogenic biomaterials. Implementation of this human placenta derived extracellular matrix provides an alternative to Matrigel and, due to its human derivation, its development may have significant clinical applications leading to advances in therapeutic angiogenesis techniques and tissue engineering.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>Arterial tissue engineering<n-term>Biomimetic material<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Immunomodulation<n-term><newabs>24712441<newchar>Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive form of primary brain tumor with a median survival of 12-15 months, and the mechanisms underlying GBM tumor progression remain largely elusive. Given the importance of tumor niche signaling in driving GBM progression, there is a strong need to develop in vitro models to facilitate analysis of brain tumor cell-niche interactions in a physiologically relevant and controllable manner. Here we report the development of a bioengineered 3D brain tumor model to help elucidate the effects of matrix stiffness on GBM cell fate using poly(ethylene-glycol) (PEG)-based hydrogels with brain-mimicking biochemical and mechanical properties. We have chosen PEG given its bioinert nature and tunable physical property, and the resulting hydrogels allow tunable matrix stiffness without changing the biochemical contents. To facilitate cell proliferation and migration, CRGDS and a MMP-cleavable peptide were chemically incorporated. Hyaluronic acid (HA) was also incorporated to mimic the concentration in the brain extracellular matrix. Using U87 cells as a model GBM cell line, we demonstrate that such biomimetic hydrogels support U87 cell growth, spreading, and migration in 3D over the course of 3 weeks in culture. Gene expression analyses showed U87 cells actively deposited extracellular matrix and continued to upregulate matrix remodeling genes. To examine the effects of matrix stiffness on GBM cell fate in 3D, we encapsulated U87 cells in soft (1 kPa) or stiff (26 kPa) hydrogels, which respectively mimics the matrix stiffness of normal brain or GBM tumor tissues. Our results suggest that changes in matrix stiffness induce differential GBM cell proliferation, morphology, and migration modes in 3D. Increasing matrix stiffness led to delayed U87 cell proliferation inside hydrogels, but cells formed denser spheroids with extended cell protrusions. Cells cultured in stiff hydrogels also showed upregulation of HA synthase 1 and matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), while simultaneously downregulating HA synthase 2 and MMP-9. This suggests that varying matrix stiffness can induce differential ECM deposition and remodeling by employing different HA synthases or MMPs. Furthermore, increasing matrix stiffness led to simultaneous upregulation of Hras, RhoA, and ROCK1, suggesting a potential link between the mechanosensing pathways and the observed differential cell responses to changes in matrix stiffness. The bioengineered 3D hydrogel platform reported here may provide a useful 3D in vitro brain tumor model for elucidating the mechanisms underlying GBM progression, as well as for evaluating the efficacy of potential drug candidates for treating GBM.<newchar><newabs>23912038<newchar>High levels of homocysteine (Hcy), known as hyperhomocysteinemia are associated with neurovascular diseases. H2S, a metabolite of Hcy, has potent anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory activities; however, the effect of H2S has not been explored in Hcy (IC)-induced neurodegeneration and neurovascular dysfunction in mice. Therefore, the present study was designed to explore the neuroprotective role of H2S on Hcy-induced neurodegeneration and neurovascular dysfunction. To test this hypothesis we employed wild-type (WT) males ages 8-10 weeks, WT+artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF), WT+Hcy (0.5 μmol/μl) intracerebral injection (IC, one time only prior to NaHS treatment), WT+Hcy+NaHS (sodium hydrogen sulfide, precursor of H2S, 30 μmol/kg, body weight). NaHS was injected i.p. once daily for the period of 7 days after the Hcy (IC) injection. Hcy treatment significantly increased malondialdehyde, nitrite level, acetylcholinestrase activity, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 beta, glial fibrillary acidic protein, inducible nitric oxide synthase, endothelial nitric oxide synthase and decreased glutathione level indicating oxidative-nitrosative stress and neuroinflammation as compared to control and aCSF-treated groups. Further, increased expression of neuron-specific enolase, S100B and decreased expression of (post-synaptic density-95, synaptosome-associated protein-97) synaptic protein indicated neurodegeneration. Brain sections of Hcy-treated mice showed damage in the cortical area and periventricular cells. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated, dUTP nick-end labeling-positive cells and Fluro Jade-C staining indicated apoptosis and neurodegeneration. The increased expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) MMP9, MMP2 and decreased expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) TIMP-1, TIMP-2, tight junction proteins (zonula occulden 1) in Hcy-treated group indicate neurovascular remodeling. Interestingly, NaHS treatment significantly attenuated Hcy-induced oxidative stress, memory deficit, neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation and cerebrovascular remodeling. The results indicate that H2S is effective in providing protection against neurodegeneration and neurovascular dysfunction.<newchar>5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid)<n-term>AChE<n-term>AD<n-term>Alzheimer’s diseases<n-term>BBB<n-term>DI<n-term>DTNB<n-term>ECM<n-term>EDTA<n-term>FJC<n-term>Fluro Jade-C<n-term>GFAP<n-term>GSH<n-term>H(2)S<n-term>HE<n-term>HRP<n-term>Hcy<n-term>Hematoxylin and Eosin<n-term>IC<n-term>IL<n-term>MDA<n-term>MMP<n-term>NSE<n-term>PBS<n-term>PD<n-term>PMSF<n-term>PSD95<n-term>PVDF<n-term>Parkinson’s disease<n-term>RI<n-term>RIPA<n-term>RT-PCR<n-term>SAP97<n-term>TBS-T<n-term>TCA<n-term>TIMP<n-term>TJPs<n-term>TNF<n-term>TUNEL<n-term>Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20<n-term>WT<n-term>ZO<n-term>aCSF<n-term>acetylcholinesterase<n-term>artificial cerebrospinal fluid<n-term>blood–brain barrier<n-term>cerebrovascular dysfunction<n-term>discrimination index<n-term>eNOS<n-term>endothelial nitric oxide synthase<n-term>ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glial fibrillary acidic protein<n-term>glutathione<n-term>homocysteine<n-term>horseradish peroxidase<n-term>iNOS<n-term>inducible nitric oxide synthase<n-term>interleukin<n-term>intracerebral<n-term>malondialdehyde<n-term>matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>neurodegeneration<n-term>neuroinflammation<n-term>neuron-specific enolase<n-term>phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride<n-term>phosphate-buffered saline<n-term>polyvinylidene difluoride<n-term>post-synaptic density-95<n-term>radio immunoprecipitation assay<n-term>recognition index<n-term>reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction<n-term>synaptosome associated protein-97<n-term>terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated, dUTP nick-end labeling<n-term>tight junction proteins<n-term>tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases<n-term>trichloroacetic acid<n-term>tumor necrosis factor<n-term>wild type<n-term>zonula occuldens<n-term><newabs>23480731<newchar>During progression to heart failure (HF), myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) alterations and tissue inflammation are central. Lumican is an ECM-localized proteoglycan associated with inflammatory conditions and known to bind collagens. We hypothesized that lumican plays a role in the dynamic alterations in cardiac ECM during development of HF. Thus, we examined left ventricular cardiac lumican in a mouse model of pressure overload and in HF patients, and investigated expression, regulation and effects of increased lumican in cardiac fibroblasts. After 4 weeks of aortic banding, mice were divided into groups of hypertrophy (AB) and HF (ABHF) based on lung weight and left atrial diameter. Sham-operated mice were used as controls. Accordingly, cardiac lumican mRNA and protein levels were increased in mice with ABHF. Similarly, cardiac biopsies from patients with end-stage HF revealed increased lumican mRNA and protein levels compared with control hearts. In vitro, mechanical stretch and the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1β increased lumican mRNA as well as secreted lumican protein from cardiac fibroblasts. Stimulation with recombinant glycosylated lumican increased collagen type I alpha 2, lysyl oxidase and transforming growth factor-β1 mRNA, which was attenuated by costimulation with an inhibitor of the proinflammatory transcription factor NFκB. Furthermore, lumican increased the levels of the dimeric form of collagen type I, decreased the activity of the collagen-degrading enzyme matrix metalloproteinase-9 and increased the phosphorylation of fibrosis-inducing SMAD3. In conclusion, cardiac lumican is increased in experimental and clinical HF. Inflammation and mechanical stimuli induce lumican production by cardiac fibroblasts and increased lumican altered molecules important for cardiac remodeling and fibrosis in cardiac fibroblasts, indicating a role in HF development.<newchar><newabs>21454527<newchar>Myocardial infarction (MI) is followed by extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, which is on the one hand required for the healing response and the formation of stable scar tissue. However, on the other hand, ECM remodeling can lead to fibrosis and decreased ventricular compliance. The small leucine-rich proteoglycan (SLRP), biglycan (bgn), has been shown to be critically involved in these processes. During post-infarct remodeling cardiac fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts which are the main cell type mediating ECM remodeling. The aim of the present study was to characterize the role of bgn in modulating the phenotype of cardiac fibroblasts. Cardiac fibroblasts were isolated from hearts of wild-type (WT) versus bgn(-/0) mice. Phenotypic characterization of the bgn(-/0) fibroblasts revealed increased proliferation. Importantly, this phenotype of bgn(-/0) fibroblasts was abolished to the WT level by reconstitution of biglycan in the ECM. TGF-β receptor II expression and phosphorylation of SMAD2 were increased. Furthermore, indicative of a myofibroblast phenotype bgn(-/0) fibroblasts were characterized by increased α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) incorporated into stress fibers, increased formation of focal adhesions, and increased contraction of collagen gels. Administration of neutralizing antibodies to TGF-β reversed the pro-proliferative, myofibroblastic phenotype. In vivo post-MI α-SMA, TGF-β receptor II expression, and SMAD2 phosphorylation were markedly increased in bgn(-/0) mice. Collectively, the data suggest that bgn deficiency promotes myofibroblast differentiation and proliferation in vitro and in vivo likely due to increased responses to TGF-β and SMAD2 signaling.<newchar><newabs>25599395<newchar>Studies have indicated that there may be a smoking-dependent association between skin wrinkling and airflow obstruction of the lung. It was suggested that this association might be because of an underlying susceptibility in genes responsible for extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Our purpose was to confirm the association between skin wrinkling and airflow obstruction and to identify genetic polymorphisms indicative of an underlying susceptibility. In 697 elderly women, we assessed skin wrinkles by SCINEXA (SCore for INtrinsic and EXtrinsic skin Aging) and airflow obstruction by spirometry, using the ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) to forced volume capacity (FVC). For association analysis, we used multiple regression and found that the FEV1/FVC ratio decreased 1.2% per 6-point increase in the wrinkle severity score after accounting for age, education, body mass index, skin type, and sun exposure. This association was significant and independent of smoking or air pollution. Most interestingly, this association occurred only in carriers of the matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) 2G (rs1799750) or the MMP-3 6A (rs3025058) allele but not in homozygous carriers of the 1G or 5A allele. Thus, skin and lung aging are linked in carriers of the 2G or 6A allele. These alleles appear to be indicative of a common genetic susceptibility.<newchar><newabs>23685250<newchar>In vitro, topographical and biophysical cues arising from the extracellular matrix (ECM) direct skeletal stem cell (SSC) commitment and differentiation. However, the mechanisms by which the SSC-ECM interface is regulated and the outcome of such interactions on stem cell fate in vivo remain unknown. Here we demonstrate that conditional deletion of the membrane-anchored metalloproteinase MT1-MMP (Mmp14) in mesenchymal progenitors, but not in committed osteoblasts, redirects SSC fate decisions from osteogenesis to adipo- and chondrogenesis. By effecting ECM remodeling, MT1-MMP regulates stem cell shape, thereby activating a β1-integrin/RhoGTPase signaling cascade and triggering the nuclear localization of the transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ, which serve to control SSC lineage commitment. These data identify a critical MT1-MMP/integrin/YAP/TAZ axis operative in the stem cell niche that oversees SSC fate determination.<newchar><newabs>21996678<newchar>Fibroproliferative remodeling in smooth muscle-rich hollow organs is associated with aberrant extracellular matrix (ECM) production. Although mechanical stimuli regulate ECM protein expression, the transcriptional mediators of this process remain poorly defined. Previously, we implicated AP-1 as a mediator of smooth muscle cell (SMC) mechanotransduction; however, its role in stretch-induced ECM regulation has not been explored. Herein, we identify a novel role for the AP-1 subunit FosB in stretch-induced ECM expression in SMCs. The DNA-binding activity of AP-1 increased after stretch stimulation of SMCs in vitro. In contrast to c-Jun and c-fos, which are also activated by the SMC mitogen platelet-derived growth factor, FosB was only activated by stretch. FosB silencing attenuated the expression of the profibrotic factors tenascin C (TNC) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), whereas forced expression of Jun~FosB stimulated TNC and CTGF promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed enrichment of AP-1 at the TNC and CTGF promoters. Bladder distension in vivo enhanced nuclear localization of c-jun and FosB. Finally, the distension-induced expression of TNC and CTGF in the detrusor smooth muscle of bladders from wild-type mice was significantly attenuated in FosB-null mice. Together, these findings identify FosB as a mechanosensitive regulator of ECM production in smooth muscle.<newchar><newabs>25984324<newchar>Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a fatal disease defined as an abdominal aortic diameter of 3.0 cm or more, where the abdominal aorta exceeds the normal diameter by more than 50%. Histopathological changes of AAA mainly include extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling at the abdominal aorta wall, but there is lack of specific drugs to treat AAA. Recent studies have reported that lysosomal cathepsins could induce vascular remodeling and AAA formation by regulating vascular inflammation, medial smooth muscle cell apoptosis, neovascularization, and protease expression. Thus, cathepsins are expected to become a new therapeutic target for AAA treatment.<newchar>Abdominal aortic aneurysm<n-term>Cathepsins<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term><newabs>25918420<newchar>Actin filaments and integrin-based focal adhesions (FAs) form integrated systems that mediate dynamic cell interactions with their environment or other cells during migration, the immune response, and tissue morphogenesis. How adhesion-associated actin structures obtain their functional specificity is unclear. Here we show that the formin-family actin nucleator, inverted formin 2 (INF2), localizes specifically to FAs and dorsal stress fibers (SFs) in fibroblasts. High-resolution fluorescence microscopy and manipulation of INF2 levels in cells indicate that INF2 plays a critical role at the SF-FA junction by promoting actin polymerization via free barbed end generation and centripetal elongation of an FA-associated actin bundle to form dorsal SF. INF2 assembles into FAs during maturation rather than during their initial generation, and once there, acts to promote rapid FA elongation and maturation into tensin-containing fibrillar FAs in the cell center. We show that INF2 is required for fibroblasts to organize fibronectin into matrix fibers and ultimately 3D matrices. Collectively our results indicate an important role for the formin INF2 in specifying the function of fibrillar FAs through its ability to generate dorsal SFs. Thus, dorsal SFs and fibrillar FAs form a specific class of integrated adhesion-associated actin structure in fibroblasts that mediates generation and remodeling of ECM.<newchar>INF2<n-term>actin<n-term>fluorescence microscopy<n-term>integrin<n-term><newabs>11851355<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activity have been observed to be relevant in the development of heart failure (HF). We examined the effects of ramipril alone or with furosemide on ECM in a heart failure model. HF was induced by occlusion of the left coronary artery in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). Rats were assigned to placebo (n=9), ramipril 1 mg/kg/day (n=11), furosemide 2 x 2 mg/kg/day (n=7) or both (1 mg/kg/day + 2 x 2 mg/kg/day n=8). LV-function, collagen content, MMP/TIMP (tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases) protein- and mRNA-expression were examined in non-infarcted LV tissue. MMP-2/TIMP-4 ratio was increased in HF. Ramipril reduced MMP-2 expression (active form), collagen type I mRNA expression and content and increased TIMP-4 levels associated with decreased left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP), mortality rate and increased LV pressure (LVP). Combination therapy with furosemide is less efficient with regard to collagen content and MMP-2 (active form) reduction but did not worsen beneficial effects of ramipril on LV function and mortality rate. Furosemide alone had no effect on MMP-2 (active form) expression, collagen content, LV function and mortality rate. Prevention of LV dilatation by ramipril was associated with decreased gelatinolytic activity and increased MMP-inhibition in heart failure SHR. Furthermore, ramipril reduced fibrosis by enhanced interstitial collagenase expression. Furosemide did not show the beneficial effects of ramipril on ECM remodeling but did not worsen LV function. Positive effects of furosemide treatment alone on LV remodeling and function were not observed.<newchar><newabs>22090349<newchar>Cardiovascular cell therapy has the potential to improve left ventricular (LV) function and alter the course of adverse LV remodeling following acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, current therapy using autologous intracoronary bone marrow mononuclear cells results in only minimal recovery of LV function. A major impediment appears to be limited retention and engraftment of the transplanted cells, in part due to loss of the extracellular matrix (ECM) following AMI that can lead to apoptosis of the delivered cells through the mechanism of anoikis. Recent pre-clinical studies suggest that the delivery of ECM surrogates to the infarct zone following AMI significantly improves LV function through multiple mechanisms. The use of ECM surrogates in conjunction with stem cell administration may represent a new paradigm for cardiac repair following AMI. This review discusses the potential use of biologically based ECM surrogates in the clinical setting following STEMI.<newchar><newabs>21092966<newchar>The importance of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in muscle is widely recognized, since ECM plays a central role in proper muscle development (Buck and Horwitz, 1987), tissue structural support (Purslow, 2002), and transmission of mechanical signals between fibers and tendon (Huijing, 1999). Since substrate biomechanical properties have been shown to be critical in the biology of tissue development and remodeling (Engler et al., 2006; Gilbert et al., 2010), it is likely that mechanics are critical for ECM to perform its function. Unfortunately, there are almost no data available regarding skeletal muscle ECM viscoelastic properties. This is primarily due to the impossibility of isolating and testing muscle ECM. Therefore, this note presents a new method to quantify viscoelastic ECM modulus by combining tests of single muscle fibers and fiber bundles. Our results demonstrate that ECM is a highly nonlinearly elastic material, while muscle fibers are linearly elastic.<newchar><newabs>23563312<newchar>Malignant melanoma is characterized by a propensity for early lymphatic and hematogenous spread. The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) family of transcription factors is upregulated in melanoma by key oncogenic drivers. HIFs promote the activation of genes involved in cancer initiation, progression, and metastases. Hypoxia has been shown to enhance the invasiveness and metastatic potential of tumor cells by regulating the genes involved in the breakdown of the ECM as well as genes that control motility and adhesion of tumor cells. Using a Pten-deficient, Braf-mutant genetically engineered mouse model of melanoma, we demonstrated that inactivation of HIF1α or HIF2α abrogates metastasis without affecting primary tumor formation. HIF1α and HIF2α drive melanoma invasion and invadopodia formation through PDGFRα and focal adhesion kinase-mediated (FAK-mediated) activation of SRC and by coordinating ECM degradation via MT1-MMP and MMP2 expression. These results establish the importance of HIFs in melanoma progression and demonstrate that HIF1α and HIF2α activate independent transcriptional programs that promote metastasis by coordinately regulating cell invasion and ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>25647660<newchar>Epidermal growth factor (EGF) plays a critical role in fibroblasts by stimulating the production of collagen and supports cell renewal through the interaction between keratinocytes and fibroblasts. It is well known that the contractile activity of fibroblasts is required for the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which contributes to skin elasticity. However, the role of EGF in the contraction of aged fibroblasts under 3-dimensional (3D) culture conditions is not yet fully understood. In the present study, we demonstrated that young fibroblasts spread and proliferated more rapidly than aged fibroblasts under 2-dimensional (2D) culture conditions. Cell migration assay using a nested collagen matrix revealed that the migration of young fibroblasts was also greater than that of aged fibroblasts under 3D culture conditions. However, the addition of recombinant human EGF (rhEGF) resulted in the enhanced migration of aged fibroblasts; the migration rate was similar to that of the young fibroblasts. The aged fibroblasts showed decreased cluster formation compared with the young fibroblasts on the collagen matrix, which was improved by the addition of rhEGF. Furthermore, cell contraction assay revealed that the basal contractility of the aged fibroblasts was lower than that of the young fibroblasts; however, following treatment with rhEGF, the contractility was restored to levels similar or even higher to those of the young fibroblasts. Taken together, our results suggest that rhEGF is a potential renewal agent that acts to improve the migration and contraction of aged fibroblasts more efficiently than young fibroblasts under 3D culture conditions; thus, EGF may have valuable regenerative effects on aged skin.<newchar><newabs>23347834<newchar>Ideal scaffolds that represent native extracellular matrix (ECM) properties of musculofascial tissues have great importance in musculofascial tissue engineering. However, detailed characterization of musculofascial tissues' ECM (particularly, of fascia) from large animals is still lacking. In this study, we developed a decellularization protocol for processing pig composite musculofascial tissues. Decellularized muscle (D-muscle) and decellularized fascia (D-fascia), which are two important components of decellularized musculofascial extracellular matrix (DMM), were comprehensively characterized. D-muscle and D-fascia retained intact three-dimensional architecture, strong mechanical properties, and bioactivity of compositions such as collagen, laminin, glycosaminoglycan, and vascular endothelial growth factor. D-muscle and D-fascia provided a compatible niche for human adipose-derived stem cell integration and proliferation. Heterotopic and orthotopic implantation of D-muscle and D-fascia in a rodent model further proved their biocompatibility and myogenic properties during the remodeling process. The differing characteristics of D-muscle from D-fascia (e.g. D-muscle's strong pro-angiogenic and pro-myogenic properties vs. D-fascia's strong mechanical properties) indicate different clinical application opportunities of D-muscle vs. D-fascia scaffolds. DMM comprising muscle and fascia ECM as a whole unit can thus provide not only a clinically translatable platform for musculofascial tissue repair and regeneration but also a useful standard for scaffold design in musculofascial tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>23454256<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts (CF) play a central role in the repair and remodeling of the heart following injury and are important regulators of inflammation and extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. ECM-regulatory matricellular proteins are synthesized by several myocardial cell types including CF. We investigated the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines on matricellular protein expression in cultured human CF. cDNA array analysis of matricellular proteins revealed that interleukin-1α (IL-1α, 10ng/ml, 6h) down-regulated connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) mRNA by 80% and up-regulated tenascin-C (TNC) mRNA levels by 10-fold in human CF, without affecting expression of thrombospondins 1-3, osteonectin or osteopontin. Western blotting confirmed these changes at the protein level. In contrast, tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) did not modulate CCN2 expression and had only a modest stimulatory effect on TNC levels. Signaling pathway inhibitor studies suggested an important role for the p38 MAPK pathway in suppressing CCN2 expression in response to IL-1α. In contrast, multiple signaling pathways (p38, JNK, PI3K/Akt and NFκB) contributed to IL-1α-induced TNC expression. In conclusion, IL-1α reduced CCN2 expression and increased TNC expression in human CF. These observations are of potential value for understanding how inflammation and ECM regulation are linked at the level of the CF.<newchar><newabs>14680479<newchar>A considerable body of research indicates that mammary gland branching morphogenesis is dependent, in part, on the extracellular matrix (ECM), ECM-receptors, such as integrins and other ECM receptors, and ECM-degrading enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). There is some evidence that these ECM cues affect one or more of the following processes: cell survival, polarity, proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, and migration. Both three-dimensional culture models and genetic manipulations of the mouse mammary gland have been used to study the signaling pathways that affect these processes. However, the precise mechanisms of ECM-directed mammary morphogenesis are not well understood. Mammary morphogenesis involves epithelial 'invasion' of adipose tissue, a process akin to invasion by breast cancer cells, although the former is a highly regulated developmental process. How these morphogenic pathways are integrated in the normal gland and how they become dysregulated and subverted in the progression of breast cancer also remain largely unanswered questions.<newchar><newabs>24338768<newchar>It has been recognized that cancer is not merely a disease of tumor cells, but a disease of imbalance, in which stromal cells and tumor microenvironment play crucial roles. Extracellular matrix (ECM) as the most abundant component in tumor microenvironment can regulate tumor cell behaviors and tissue tension homeostasis. Collagen constitutes the scaffold of tumor microenvironment and affects tumor microenvironment such that it regulates ECM remodeling by collagen degradation and re-deposition, and promotes tumor infiltration, angiogenesis, invasion and migration. While collagen was traditionally regarded as a passive barrier to resist tumor cells, it is now evident that collagen is also actively involved in promoting tumor progression. Collagen changes in tumor microenvironment release biomechanical signals, which are sensed by both tumor cells and stromal cells, trigger a cascade of biological events. In this work, we discuss how collagen can be a double-edged sword in tumor progression, both inhibiting and promoting tumor progression at different stages of cancer development.<newchar><newabs>23624218<newchar>Mesenchymal stromal cells residing in proteolytically responsive hydrogel scaffolds were subjected to changes in mechanical properties associated with their own three-dimensional (3-D) morphogenesis. In order to investigate this relationship the current study documents the transient degradation and restructuring of fibroblasts seeded in hydrogel scaffolds undergoing active cell-mediated reorganization over 7days in culture. A semi-synthetic proteolytically degradable polyethylene glycol-fibrinogen (PF) hydrogel matrix and neonatal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) were used. Rheology (in situ and ex situ) measured stiffening of the gels and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) measured cell morphogenesis within the gels. The assumption that the matrix modulus systematically decreases as cells locally begin to enzymatically disassemble the PF hydrogel to become spindled in the material was not supported by the bulk mechanical property measurements. Instead, the PF hydrogels exhibited cell-mediated stiffening concurrent with their dynamic morphogenesis, as indicated by a four-fold increase in storage modulus after 1week in culture. Fibrin hydrogels, which were used as the control biomaterial, proved similarly adaptive to cell-mediated remodeling only in the presence of the exogenous serine protease inhibitor aprotinin. Acellular and non-viable hydrogels also served as control groups to verify that transient matrix remodeling was entirely associated with cell-mediated events, including collagen deposition, cell-mediated proteolysis, and the formation of multicellular networks within the hydrogel constructs. The fact that cell network formation and collagen deposition both paralleled transient stiffening of the PF hydrogels, further reinforces the notion that cells actively balance between proteolysis and ECM synthesis when remodeling proteolytically responsive hydrogel scaffolds.<newchar><newabs>25548101<newchar>Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), the most abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME), are a key source of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that constitutes the desmoplastic stroma. Through remodeling of the reactive tumor stroma and paracrine actions, CAFs regulate cancer initiation, progression, and metastasis, as well as tumor resistance to therapies. The CAFs found in stroma-rich primary hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and liver metastases of primary cancers of other organs predominantly originate from hepatic stellate cells (HSTC), which are pericytes associated with hepatic sinusoids. During tumor invasion, HSTCs transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts in response to paracrine signals emanating from either tumor cells or a heterogeneous cell population within the hepatic tumor microenvironment. Mechanistically, HSTC-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation, also known as, HSTC activation, requires cell surface receptor activation, intracellular signal transduction, gene transcription, and epigenetic signals, which combined ultimately modulate distinct gene expression profiles that give rise to and maintain a new phenotype. The current review defines a paradigm that explains how HSTCs are activated into CAFs to promote liver metastasis. Furthermore, a focus on the most relevant intracellular signaling networks and epigenetic mechanisms that control HSTC activation is provided. Finally, we discuss the feasibility of targeting CAF/activated HSTCs, in isolation or in conjunction with targeting cancer cells, which constitutes a promising and viable therapeutic approach for the treatment of primary stroma-rich liver cancers and liver metastasis.<newchar><newabs>12588887<newchar>SPARC, a 32-kDa glycoprotein, participates in the regulation of morphogenesis and cellular differentiation through its modulation of cell-matrix interactions. Major functions defined for SPARC in vitro are de-adhesion and antiproliferation. In vivo, SPARC is restricted in its expression to remodeling tissues, including pathologies such as cancer. However, the function of endogenous SPARC in tumor growth and progression is not known. Here, we report that implanted tumors grew more rapidly in mice lacking SPARC. We observed that tumors grown in SPARC null mice showed alterations in the production and organization of ECM components and a decrease in the infiltration of macrophages. However, there was no change in the levels of angiogenic growth factors in comparison to tumors grown in wild-type mice, although there was a statistically significant difference in total vascular area. Whereas SPARC did inhibit the growth of tumor cells in vitro, it did not have a demonstrable effect on the proliferation or apoptosis of tumor cells in vivo. These data indicate that host-derived SPARC is important for the appropriate organization of the ECM in response to implanted tumors and highlight the importance of the ECM in regulating tumor growth.<newchar><newabs>23591997<newchar>Increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and airway smooth muscle (ASM) mass are major contributors to airway remodeling in asthma. Recently, we demonstrated that the ECM protein collagen I, which is increased surrounding asthmatic ASM, induces a proliferative, hypocontractile ASM phenotype. Little is known, however, about the signaling pathways involved. Using bovine tracheal smooth muscle, we investigated the role of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and downstream signaling pathways in collagen I-induced ASM phenotype modulation. Phosphorylation of FAK was increased during adhesion to both uncoated and collagen I-coated culture dishes, without differences between these matrices. Nor were any differences found in cellular adhesion. Inhibition of FAK activity by overexpression of the FAK deletion mutants FAT (focal adhesion targeting domain) and FRNK (FAK-related nonkinase) attenuated adhesion. After attachment, FAK phosphorylation increased in a time-dependent manner in cells cultured on collagen I, whereas no activation was found on an uncoated plastic matrix. In addition, collagen I increased in a time- and concentration-dependent manner the cell proliferation, which was fully inhibited by FAT and FRNK. Similarly, the specific pharmacologic FAK inhibitor PF-573228 [6-((4-((3-(methanesulfonyl)benzyl)amino)-5-trifluoromethylpyrimidin-2-yl) amino)-3,4-dihydro-1H-quinolin-2-one] as well as specific inhibitors of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and Src also fully inhibited collagen I-induced proliferation, whereas partial inhibition was observed by inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK). The inhibition of cell proliferation by these inhibitors was associated with attenuation of the collagen I-induced hypocontractility. Collectively, the results indicate that induction of a proliferative, hypocontractile ASM phenotype by collagen I is mediated by FAK and downstream signaling pathways.<newchar><newabs>24677721<newchar>Integrins are cell surface receptors that connect extracellular matrix (ECM) components to the actin cytoskeleton and transmit chemical and mechanical signals into the cells through adhesion complexes. Integrin-activated downstream pathways have been implicated in the regulation of various cellular functions, including proliferation, survival, migration, and differentiation. Integrin-based attachment to the matrix plays a central role in development, tissue morphogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, remodeling and repair, and disturbance of the ECM-integrin-cytoskeleton signaling axis often results in diseases and tissue dysfunction. Increasing amount of in vitro and in vivo evidences suggest that integrins are pivotal for proper development, function, and regeneration of skeletal tissues. In this paper, we will summarize and discuss the role of integrins in skeletogenesis and their influence on the physiology and pathophysiology of cartilage, bone, and tendon.<newchar>articular cartilage<n-term>bone<n-term>cartilage<n-term>integrin signaling<n-term>integrins<n-term>knockout mice<n-term>mesenchymal stem cell<n-term>skeletal development<n-term>synovial joint<n-term>tendon<n-term><newabs>23564555<newchar>Macrophages play a critical role in mediating not only normal tissue healing, but also the host reaction against biomaterial scaffolds. There is increasing interest in regenerative medicine to combine mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) with biomaterial scaffolds to modulate inflammatory response while restoring tissue architecture. The objective of the current study was to investigate the interaction between MSCs (derived from bone marrow, adipose or vocal fold tissue) encapsulated in hyaluronan-based hydrogel and differentiating macrophages as measured by extracellular matrix (ECM) gene expression and cytokine, chemokine, and growth factor concentrations. Gene expression was analyzed using real-time polymerase chain reaction from MSCs embedded in Carbylan-GSX after 7 days of coculture with or without CD14+ cells. Protein concentrations were measured using a Bio-plex assay from cell culture supernatants on days 3 and 7 for all conditions. Following 7 days, we identified upregulation of collagen-I, collagen-III, procollagen, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 genes compared to control conditions. We demonstrate increased concentrations of immunoregulatory cytokines [interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α, macrophage inflammatory protein-1α, IFN-γ, IL-12, and IL-10] and remodeling growth factors (vascular endothelial growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor) in MSC-3D constructs cocultured with macrophages compared to control conditions, with some temporal variation. Our results indicate an alteration of expression of ECM proteins important to tissue regeneration and cytokines critical to the inflammatory cascade when 3D constructs were cultured with differentiating macrophages.<newchar>biomaterials<n-term>hyaluronic acid<n-term>immunomodulation<n-term>mesenchymal stromal/stem cells<n-term>tissue engineering<n-term><newabs>23528452<newchar>Cancers become significantly more dangerous when the tumor progresses from in situ, or contained, to an invasive state, in which the cancer cells acquire the ability to pass through the surrounding basement membrane (BM), a specialized extracellular matrix (ECM) that provides structure and contextual information to the underlying tissue. While the majority of tumors are carcinomas, derived from epithelial cells, it is the stromal cells surrounding the epithelial-derived tumor cells, including fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, vasculature, and immune cells, that are largely responsible for the production and remodeling of the ECM. Here, we will discuss myofibroblasts as key effectors of tumor progression, focusing on recent advances in breast and pancreatic carcinoma, showing how myofibroblasts may function properly in normal tissue remodeling and wound-healing processes, how in the tumor context they can drive cancer invasion and metastasis, and how the pathogenic functions of myofibroblasts may be targeted therapeutically.<newchar>Breast cancer<n-term>Epithelial–mesenchymal transition<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Myofibroblast<n-term>Pancreatic cancer<n-term>Tissue disruption<n-term><newabs>24042342<newchar>Keloids are defined as overgrowths of scar tissue resulting from abnormal wound healing. They are characterized by excessive dermal deposition of thick, hyalinized collagen bundles resulting from an imbalance between the production and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are two important regulators of ECM degradation and remodeling. To evaluate the role played by knockdown of TIMPs in keloid formation, we transduced human keloid-derived fibroblasts (KFs) with small interfering RNAs targeting TIMP-1 or -2 (siTIMP-1 or siTIMP-2) using a lentiviral vector and assessed the biological effects. We found that MMP-1/TIMP-1 and MMP-1/TIMP-2 complexes were suppressed and that MMP-2 activity was upregulated in KFs expressing siTIMP-1 or siTIMP-2. In addition, increased degradation of collagen type I was observed in the supernatant of KFs expressing siTIMP-1, but not siTIMP-2, with the suppression of cell viability and induction of apoptosis. These results suggest that targeting TIMP-1 using small interfering RNA has significant therapeutic potential as an approach to treating keloids through degradation of their thick collagen bundles.<newchar><newabs>22673002<newchar>Invadosomes are actin-rich finger-like cellular structures sensing and interacting with the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) and involved in its proteolytic remodeling. Invadosomes are structures distinct from other adhesion complexes, and have been identified in normal cells that have to cross tissue barriers to fulfill their function such as leukocytes, osteoclasts and endothelial cells. They also represent features of highly aggressive cancer cells, allowing them to escape from the primary tumor, to invade surrounding tissues and to reach systemic circulation. They are localized to the ventral membrane of cells grown under 2-dimensional conditions and are supposed to be present all around cells grown in 3-dimensional matrices. Indeed invadosomes are key structures in physiological processes such as inflammation and the immune response, bone remodeling, tissue repair, but also in pathological conditions such as osteopetrosis and the development of metastases. Invadosomes are subdivided into podosomes, found in normal cells, and into invadopodia specific for cancer cells. While these two structures exhibit differences in organization, size, number and half-life, they share similarities in molecular composition, participation in cell-matrix adhesion and promoting matrix degradation. A key determinant in invadosomal function is the recruitment and release of proteases, such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), serine proteases and cysteine cathepsins, together with their activation in a tightly controlled and highly acidic microenvironment. Therefore numerous pH regulators such as V-ATPases and Na(+)/H(+) exchangers, are found in invadosomes and are directly involved in their constitution as well as their functioning. This review focuses on the participation of pH regulators in invadosome function in physiological and pathological conditions, with a particular emphasis on ECM remodeling by osteoclasts during bone resorption and by cancer cells.<newchar><newabs>16452184<newchar>Inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene results in highly vascularized tumors, making the VHL tumor syndrome an ideal system to study the mechanisms of angiogenesis. VHL operates along two pathways with the first involving hypoxia-inducible factor-alpha degradation and down-regulation of its proangiogenic target genes vascular endothelial growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor-beta, and the second pathway promoting extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly. Secretion of proangiogenic factors was shown to be a primary inducer of angiogenesis. Here, we show that loss of ECM assembly correlates with tumor angiogenesis in VHL disease. Upon inactivation of the VHL-ECM assembly pathway, we observe tumors that are highly vascularized, have a disrupted ECM, and show increased matrix metalloproteinase-2 activity. Loss of the VHL pathway leading to hypoxia-inducible factor-alpha degradation results in tumors with increased vascular endothelial growth factor levels but with surprisingly low microvessel density, a tightly assembled ECM and low invasive ability. We conclude that loss of ECM integrity could promote and maintain tumor angiogenesis by providing a route for blood vessels to infiltrate tumors.<newchar><newabs>23830581<newchar>Incorporation of degradable moieties into synthetic hydrogels has greatly increased the utility of these three-dimensional matrices for in vitro cell culture as well as tissue engineering applications. A common method for introducing degradability is the inclusion of oligopeptides sensitive to cleavage by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), enabling cell-mediated remodeling and migration within the material. While this strategy has been effective, characterization and measurement of cell-mediated degradation in these materials has remained challenging. There are 20+ MMP family members whose activity is regulated in space and time by a number of biochemical and biophysical cues. Thus, the typical approach of characterizing cleavage of degradable moieties in solution with recombinant enzymes does not easily translate to three-dimensional cell-mediated matrix remodeling. To address this challenge, we report here the synthesis of a cell-laden hydrogel matrix functionalized with a fluorogenic peptide substrate to provide real-time, quantitative monitoring of global MMP activity. Using this system, stimulation of MMP activity was observed with growth factor treatment in mammary epithelial cells and compared to classical zymography results. Further, the effect of biophysical cues on MMP activity of human mesenchymal stem cells was also investigated where more rigid hydrogels were observed to increase MMP activity. The regulation of MMP activity by these biochemical and biophysical cues highlights the need for in situ, real-time measurement of hydrogel degradation, and use of these functionalized hydrogels will aid in future rational design of degradable synthetic hydrogels for in vitro cell studies and tissue engineering applications.<newchar>2D<n-term>3D<n-term>Biosensor<n-term>Degradation<n-term>ECM<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>LAP<n-term>MMP<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>Mechanical properties<n-term>PEG-NB<n-term>Peptide<n-term>RSD<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hMSC<n-term>human mesenchymal stem cells<n-term>lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>poly(ethylene glycol)-norbornene<n-term>relative standard deviation<n-term>three-dimensional<n-term>two-dimensional<n-term><newabs>16738537<newchar>Most advanced glomerular diseases are characterized by abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation in the glomeruli, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in ECM remodeling in various glomerular diseases. The proto-oncogene, ets-1, is a transcription factor regulating the expression of various matrix proteinases, including MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-9. The goal of the present study was to characterize the role of Ets-1 in the progression of glomerular diseases. Overexpression of Ets-1 in cultured mesangial cells prevented transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-induced inhibition of DNA-binding activity and TGF-beta-induced type I collagen production. In addition, exogenous Ets-1 abolished TGF-beta-induced collagen gel contraction. The in vivo transfection of the ets-1 gene into nephritic kidney resulted in the increases in glomerular MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-9 mRNA, decreases in mesangial ECM deposition, and attenuation of fibronectin extradomain A (EDA) and type I collagen expression. In contrast, knockdown of Ets-1 in glomeruli resulted in severe ECM deposition in diseased glomeruli. In conclusion, Ets-1 promotes degradation of ECM proteins and is critical for integral glomerular reorganization.<newchar><newabs>19592613<newchar>Metabolic syndrome (MetS) represents an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Although its individual components adversely affect cardiac structure and function, the extent to which multiple components of MetS affect the cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) has not been well characterized. Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is one of the cardiac ECM-modifying enzymes that catalyze the formation of collagen cross-linking. Our objective was to define the effect of diet-induced MetS on the LOX enzyme. MetS was induced in male C57BL/6 mice by administrating a high-fat, high-simple carbohydrate diet for 6 mo. Gene expression was determined by real-time PCR. The cardiac protein expression and enzymatic activity of LOX were measured. The severity of fibrosis was assessed by histology and hydroxylproline assay. Cardiac diastolic function was assessed by in vivo analysis of the pressure-volume relationship. LOX, matrix metalloproteinases, and their tissue inhibitors were analyzed, and of these three, LOX was most significantly changed in the MetS mice. Despite the blunted gene expression of LOX isoforms, MetS mice demonstrated a significant upregulation of bone morphogenetic protein-1. Correspondingly, there was an increase in the ratio of protein expression of mature to proenzyme LOX by 25.9%, enhanced LOX activity by 50.0%, and increased cardiac cross-linked collagen compared with the controls. This fibrotic response coincided with a marked increase in end-diastolic pressure, increased left ventricular stiffness, and impaired diastolic filling pattern. Our data signify that diet-induced MetS alters the remodeling enzymes, mainly LOX, thereby altering ECM structure by increasing the amount of cross-linking and inducing diastolic dysfunction.<newchar><newabs>24713275<newchar>Fibrosis--a debilitating condition that can occur in most organs - is characterized by excess deposition of a collagen-rich extracellular matrix (ECM). At first sight, the activities of proteinases that can degrade matrix, such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), might be expected to be under-expressed in fibrosis or, if present, could function to resolve the excess matrix. However, as we review here, some MMPs are indeed anti-fibrotic, whereas others can have pro-fibrotic functions. MMPs modulate a range of biological processes, especially processes related to immunity and tissue repair and/or remodeling. Although we do not yet know precisely how MMPs function during fibrosis--that is, the protein substrate or substrates that an individual MMP acts on to effect a specific process--experiments in mouse models demonstrate that MMP-dependent functions during fibrosis are not limited to effects on ECM turnover. Rather, data from diverse models indicate that these proteinases influence cellular activities as varied as proliferation and survival, gene expression, and multiple aspects of inflammation that, in turn, impact outcomes related to fibrosis.<newchar>Collagen<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>Metalloproteinase<n-term>TIMP<n-term><newabs>23460554<newchar>Numerous studies have shown that extracellular matrix (ECM)-based scaffolds are suitable for dermal constructs for the differentiation of various cell types in vitro and for constructive tissue remodeling after implantation in vivo. However, a shortcoming of these ECM materials is its limited elastogenesis. Elastic fibers constitute an essential component of mammalian connective tissue and the presence of elastic fibers is crucial for the proper function of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, and intestinal systems. Since it is still largely unknown how cells coordinate the molecular events of elastic-fiber assembly, understanding the ability to regenerate elastic fibers in tissues remains a significant challenge. For this reason, human neonatal dermal fibroblasts (HDFneo) were analyzed for their potential to serve as a cell culture model for elastic fiber assembly. Using optical technologies such as multiphoton laser-scanning microscopy (MPSLM) we demonstrate that HDFneo stimulated with transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) are able to produce a distinct and complex elastic fiber system in vitro. As shown by the desmosine and isodesmosine content, crosslinked elastic fibers were formed within the 3D ECM-based scaffold. This tissue-engineered dermal construct may prove to be an effective template for the development of medicinal approaches in regenerative soft skin tissue reconstruction through TGF-β1 induction.<newchar><newabs>21997121<newchar>Considerable progress has been made toward a molecular understanding of how cells form lumen and tube structures in three-dimensional (3D) extracellular matrices (ECM). This progress has occurred through work performed with endothelial and epithelial cell models using both in vitro and in vivo approaches. Despite the apparent similarities between endothelial and epithelial cell lumen and tube formation mechanisms, there are clear distinctions that directly relate to their functional differences. This review will focus on endothelial cell (EC) lumen formation mechanisms which control blood vessel formation during development and postnatal life. Of great interest is that an EC lumen signaling complex has been identified which controls human EC lumen and tube formation in 3D matrices and which coordinates integrin-ECM contacts, cell surface proteolysis, cytoskeletal rearrangements, and cell polarity. This complex consists of the collagen-binding integrin α2β1, the collagen-degrading membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), junction adhesion molecule (Jam)C, JamB, polarity proteins Par3 and Par6b, and the Rho GTPase Cdc42-GTP. These interacting proteins are necessary to stimulate 3D matrix-specific signaling events (including activation of protein kinase cascades that regulate the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons) to control the formation of EC lumens and tube networks. Also, EC lumen formation is directly coupled to the generation of vascular guidance tunnels, enzymatically generated ECM conduits that facilitate EC tube remodeling and maturation. Mural cells such as pericytes are recruited along EC tubes within these tunnel spaces to control ECM remodeling events resulting in vascular basement membrane matrix assembly, a key step in tube maturation and stabilization.<newchar><newabs>23526266<newchar>Cardiac hormone atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and its receptor natriuretic peptide receptor-A (NPR-A) system acts as an intrinsic negative regulator of abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in the heart. However, the underlying mechanism by which ANP/NPR-A system opposes the ECM remodeling in the diseased heart is not well understood. Here, we investigated the anti-fibrotic mechanism of ANP/NPR-A in fibrotic agonist Angiotensin- II (ANG II)-treated adult cardiac fibroblast (CF) cells. Normal and NPR-A-suppressed adult CF cells were treated with ANG II (10(-7) M) in the presence and absence of ANP (10(-8) M) for 24 h. Total collagen concentration, activity and expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9, and nuclear translocation of Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB-p50) were studied. NPR-A-suppressed adult CF cells exhibited a more pronounced increase in collagen production, ROS generation, and NF-κB-p50 nuclear translocation as compared to adult CF cells treated with agonist alone. ANP co-treatment significantly reverses the agonist-induced above changes in normal adult CF cells, while it failed to reverse the agonist-induced collagen synthesis in the NPR-A-suppressed adult CF cells. The cGMP analog (8-bromo-cGMP) treatment significantly attenuated the agonist-induced collagen synthesis both in normal and NPR-A-suppressed adult cells. The results of this study suggest that ANP/NPR-A signaling system antagonizes the agonist-induced collagen synthesis via suppressing the activities of MMP-2, MMP-9, ROS generation, and NF-κB nuclear translocation mechanism.<newchar><newabs>21778414<newchar>Airway remodeling decreases lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition is increased in remodeled airways and drives cellular processes of proliferation, migration, and inflammation. We investigated the role of cigarette smoke in altering the ECM deposited from human lung fibroblasts. Lung fibroblasts isolated from patients with COPD or other lung disease were exposed to cigarette smoke extract (CSE) and 5 ng/ml transforming growth factor-β1 for 72 hours; in some experiments, inhibitors of signaling molecules were added. Deposition of perlecan, fibronectin, and elastin were measured by ELISA, as was release of IL-8 and IL-13. Unstimulated fibroblast cells were reseeded onto deposited matrix and assessed for proliferation and cytokine release. CSE (5%) increased deposition of fibronectin and perlecan from only COPD fibroblasts. Fibronectin and perlecan deposition was attenuated by addition of the NF-κB inhibitor, BMS-345541, and the signal transduction and activator of transcription-1/3 inhibitor, pyridone 6, respectively. CSE (5%) increased IL-8 release from COPD fibroblasts more than non-COPD fibroblasts. This increase was attenuated by BMS-345541. Matrix deposited after 5% CSE stimulation increased proliferation of fibroblasts, but did not alter cytokine release. ECM produced from COPD fibroblasts after CSE exposure has proproliferative effects. Thus, the ECM in patients with COPD may create an environment that promotes airway remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23791550<newchar>Egg yolk phosvitin is one of the most highly phosphorylated extracellular matrix proteins known in nature with unique physico-chemical properties deemed to be critical during ex-vivo egg embryo development. We have utilized our unique live mouse calvarial bone organ culture models under conditions which dissociates the two bone remodeling stages, viz., resorption by osteoclasts and formation by osteoblasts, to highlight important and to date unknown critical biological functions of egg phosvitin. In our resorption model live bone cultures were grown in the absence of ascorbate and were stimulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH) to undergo rapid osteoclast formation/differentiation with bone resorption. In this resorption model native phosvitin potently inhibited PTH-induced osteoclastic bone resorption with simultaneous new osteoid/bone formation in the absence of ascorbate (vitamin C). These surprising and critical observations were extended using the bone formation model in the absence of ascorbate and in the presence of phosvitin which supported the above results. The results were corroborated by analyses for calcium release or uptake, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase activity (marker for osteoclasts), alkaline phosphatase activity (marker for osteoblasts), collagen and hydroxyproline composition, and histological and quantitative histomorphometric evaluations. The data revealed that the discovered bioactivity of phosvitin mirrors that of ascorbate during collagen synthesis and the formation of new osteoid/bone. Complementing those studies use of the synthetic collagen peptide analog and cultured calvarial osteoblasts in conjunction with mass spectrometric analysis provided results that augmented the bone organ culture work and confirmed the capacity of phosvitin to stimulate differentiation of osteoblasts, collagen synthesis, hydroxyproline formation, and biomineralization. There are striking implications and interrelationships of this affect that relates to the evolutionary inactivation of the gene of an enzyme L-gulono-γ-lactone oxidase, which is involved in the final step of ascorbate biosynthesis, in many vertebrate species including passeriform birds, reptiles and teleost fish whose egg yolk contain phosvitin. These represent examples of how developing ex-vivo embryos of such species can achieve connective tissue and skeletal system formation in the absence of ascorbate.<newchar>BSP<n-term>CKI<n-term>Ca-P<n-term>Calvarial bone organ culture<n-term>Collagen synthesis<n-term>DMEM<n-term>Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium<n-term>ECM<n-term>ER<n-term>Egg yolk embryo organogenesis<n-term>Evolution<n-term>LC–ESI–MS/MS<n-term>MS<n-term>Mass spectrometry<n-term>OPN<n-term>Osteoblasts<n-term>Osteoclasts<n-term>P-Ser<n-term>P-Thr<n-term>P-Tyr<n-term>PTH<n-term>Phosvitin<n-term>RANKL<n-term>TRAP<n-term>bone sialoprotein<n-term>calcium phosphate<n-term>casein kinase I<n-term>endoplasmic reticulum<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>liquid-chromatography–electrospray-ionization–tandem mass spectrometry<n-term>mCKII<n-term>mass spectrometry<n-term>microsomal casein kinase II<n-term>osteopontin<n-term>parathyroid hormone<n-term>phosphoserine<n-term>phosphothreonine<n-term>phosphotyrosine<n-term>receptor activator of nuclear factor-Κβ ligand<n-term>tartrate resistant acid phosphatase<n-term><newabs>25372732<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an important role during physiological tissue remodeling in embryonic development and angiogenesis, as well as in pathophysiological conditions such as obesity and development and vulnerability of atherosclerotic plaque. Moreover, MMP circulating levels have emerged as potential biomarkers of cardiovascular disease. MMP expression and activity are regulated by different factors such as insulin resistance and obesity. Expanded fat tissue has been demonstrated to be an active organ, where MMPs also exert a role in adipogenesis, angiogenesis, and proliferation of extracellular matrix (ECM). However, the lack of association between adipose tissue and plasma levels of some MMPs, specifically MMP-2 and MMP-9, suggests that this tissue is not a major contributor to circulating gelatinases. MMPs are also co-expressed or co-repressed in response to inflammatory adipocytokines, like adiponectin and leptin. Adiponectin may also play a protective role in plaque rupture through selectively increasing the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) expression. Leptin induces the expression of MMP-2 activators as well as the expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 in different human cells. Furthermore, sex hormones also participate in MMP regulation. In postmenopausal women, hormone replacement therapy produces an increase in MMP activity, leading to a breakdown in ECM homeostasis and accelerated progression of vascular pathologies. Besides, in men, an inverse relationship between testosterone levels and MMP-2 activity has been described. It is still necessary to go forward in the study of MMPs in different metabolic situations to corroborate their role as vulnerable plaque biomarkers.<newchar><newabs>23891718<newchar>Cells undergo dynamic remodeling of the cytoskeleton during adhesion and migration on various extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates in response to physiological and pathological cues. The major mediators of such cellular responses are the heterodimeric adhesion receptors, the integrins. Extracellular or intracellular signals emanating from different signaling cascades cause inside-out signaling of integrins via talin, a cystokeletal protein that links integrins to the actin cytoskeleton. Various integrin subfamilies communicate with each other and growth factor receptors under diverse cellular contexts to facilitate or inhibit various integrin-mediated functions. Since talin is an essential mediator of integrin activation, much of the integrin crosstalk would therefore be influenced by talin. However, despite the existence of an extensive body of knowledge on the role of talin in integrin activation and as a stabilizer of ECM-actin linkage, information on its role in regulating inter-integrin communication is limited. This review will focus on the structure of talin, its regulation of integrin activation and discuss its potential role in integrin crosstalk. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Reciprocal influences between cell cytoskeleton and membrane channels, receptors and transporters. Guest Editor: Jean Claude Hervé.<newchar>Actin<n-term>Crosstalk<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Talin<n-term><newabs>22100243<newchar>Inflammation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling contribute to the development of congestive heart failure (CHF), but the pathogenesis is still incompletely understood. Therefore, whole blood samples from eight dogs without cardiac disease and eight dogs with CHF were investigated for mRNA expression of IL1β, IL2, IL4, IL6, IL8, IL10, TNFα, IFNγ, TGFβ1-3, MMP1, -2, -3, -9 and TIMP1-4 using quantitative PCR. Dogs with CHF had significantly higher IL1β (P=0.015), IL2 (P=0.043), MMP1 (P=0.031), TIMP3 (P=0.012) and lower TNFα (P&lt;0.001), TGFβ3 (P=0.006), TIMP1 (P=0.015) and TIMP2 (P=0.011) mRNA levels. Increased pro-inflammatory IL1β and anti-fibrotic MMP1 and reduced pro-fibrotic TGFβ and TIMP1 and TIMP2 in dogs with CHF suggest progressive left ventricular remodeling. The reduction of TNFα and increase of immunomodulatory IL2 and TIMP3 might suggest control of the inflammatory response. A better understanding of inflammation and ECM remodeling in cardiac diseases may lead to novel treatment approaches.<newchar><newabs>24443019<newchar>Collagens are the most abundant components of the extracellular matrix and many types of soft tissues. Elastin is another major component of certain soft tissues, such as arterial walls and ligaments. Many other molecules, though lower in quantity, function as essential components of the extracellular matrix in soft tissues. Some of these are reviewed in this chapter. Besides their basic structure, biochemistry and physiology, their roles in disorders of soft tissues are discussed only briefly as most chapters in this volume deal with relevant individual compounds. Fibronectin with its muldomain structure plays a role of &quot;master organizer&quot; in matrix assembly as it forms a bridge between cell surface receptors, e.g., integrins, and compounds such collagen, proteoglycans and other focal adhesion molecules. It also plays an essential role in the assembly of fibrillin-1 into a structured network. Laminins contribute to the structure of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and modulate cellular functions such as adhesion, differentiation, migration, stability of phenotype, and resistance towards apoptosis. Though the primary role of fibrinogen is in clot formation, after conversion to fibrin by thrombin, it also binds to a variety of compounds, particularly to various growth factors, and as such fibrinogen is a player in cardiovascular and extracellular matrix physiology. Elastin, an insoluble polymer of the monomeric soluble precursor tropoelastin, is the main component of elastic fibers in matrix tissue where it provides elastic recoil and resilience to a variety of connective tissues, e.g., aorta and ligaments. Elastic fibers regulate activity of TGFβs through their association with fibrillin microfibrils. Elastin also plays a role in cell adhesion, cell migration, and has the ability to participate in cell signaling. Mutations in the elastin gene lead to cutis laxa. Fibrillins represent the predominant core of the microfibrils in elastic as well as non-elastic extracellular matrixes, and interact closely with tropoelastin and integrins. Not only do microfibrils provide structural integrity of specific organ systems, but they also provide a scaffold for elastogenesis in elastic tissues. Fibrillin is important for the assembly of elastin into elastic fibers. Mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene are closely associated with Marfan syndrome. Fibulins are tightly connected with basement membranes, elastic fibers and other components of extracellular matrix and participate in formation of elastic fibers. Tenascins are ECM polymorphic glycoproteins found in many connective tissues in the body. Their expression is regulated by mechanical stress both during development and in adulthood. Tenascins mediate both inflammatory and fibrotic processes to enable effective tissue repair and play roles in pathogenesis of Ehlers-Danlos, heart disease, and regeneration and recovery of musculo-tendinous tissue. One of the roles of thrombospondin 1 is activation of TGFβ. Increased expression of thrombospondin and TGFβ activity was observed in fibrotic skin disorders such as keloids and scleroderma. Cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) or thrombospondin-5 is primarily present in the cartilage. High levels of COMP are present in fibrotic scars and systemic sclerosis of the skin, and in tendon, especially with physical activity, loading and post-injury. It plays a role in vascular wall remodeling and has been found in atherosclerotic plaques as well.<newchar><newabs>24962629<newchar>Flexor tendon injuries caused by deep lacerations to the hands are a challenging problem as they often result in debilitating adhesions that prevent the movement of the afflicted fingers. Evidence exists that tendon adhesions as well as scarring throughout the body are largely precipitated by the pleiotropic growth factor, Transforming Growth Factor Beta 1(TGF-β1), but the effects of TGF-β1 are poorly understood in tendon healing. Using an in vitro model of tendon healing, we previously found that TGF-β1 causes gene expression changes in tenocytes that are consistent with scar tissue and adhesion formation, including upregulation of the anti-fibrinolytic protein, PAI-1. Therefore, we hypothesized that TGF-β1 contributes to scarring and adhesions by reducing the activity of proteases responsible for ECM degradation and remodeling, such as plasmin and MMPs, via upregulation of PAI-1. To test our hypothesis, we examined the effects of TGF-β1 on the protease activity of tendon cells. We found that flexor tendon tenocytes treated with TGF-β1 had significantly reduced levels of active MMP-2 and plasmin. Interestingly, the effects of TGF-β1 on protease activity were completely abolished in tendon cells from homozygous plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) knockout (KO) mice, which are unable to express PAI-1. Our findings support the hypothesis that TGF-β1 induces PAI-1, which suppresses plasmin and plasmin-mediated MMP activity, and provide evidence that PAI-1 may be a novel therapeutic target for preventing adhesions and promoting a scarless, regenerative repair of flexor tendon injuries.<newchar><newabs>23856290<newchar>Pregnancy is associated with uteroplacental and vascular remodeling in order to adapt for the growing fetus and the hemodynamic changes in the maternal circulation. We have previously shown upregulation of uterine matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) during pregnancy. Whether pregnancy-associated changes in MMPs are localized to the uterus or are generalized in feto-placental and maternal circulation is unclear. Also, the mechanisms causing the changes in uteroplacental and vascular MMPs during pregnancy are unclear. MMPs expression, activity and tissue distribution were measured in uterus, placenta and aorta of virgin, mid-pregnant (mid-Preg) and late pregnant (late-Preg) rats. Western blots and gelatin zymography revealed increases in MMP-2 and -9 in uterus and aorta of late-Preg compared with virgin and mid-Preg rats. In contrast, MMP-2 and -9 were decreased in placenta of late-Preg versus mid-Preg rats. Extracellular MMP inducer (EMMPRIN) was increased in uterus and aorta of pregnant rats, but was less in placenta of late-Preg than mid-Preg rats. Prolonged treatment of uterus or aorta of virgin rats with 17β-estradiol and progesterone increased the amount of EMMPRIN, MMP-2 and -9, and the sex hormone-induced increases in MMPs were prevented by EMMPRIN neutralizing antibody. Immunohistochemistry revealed that MMP-2 and -9 and EMMPRIN increased in uterus and aorta of pregnant rats, but decreased in placenta of late-Preg versus mid-Preg rats. Thus pregnancy-associated upregulation of uterine MMPs is paralleled by increased vascular MMPs, and both are mediated by EMMPRIN and induced by estrogen and progesterone, suggesting similar role of MMPs in uterine and vascular tissue remodeling and function during pregnancy. The decreased MMPs and EMMPRIN in placenta of late-Preg rats suggests reduced role of MMPs in feto-placental circulation during late pregnancy.<newchar>17β-estradiol<n-term>Blood vessels<n-term>E2<n-term>ECM<n-term>EMMPRIN<n-term>MMP<n-term>Myometrium<n-term>P4<n-term>Placenta<n-term>Sex hormones<n-term>VSM<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer<n-term>late pregnant<n-term>late-Preg<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>mid-Preg<n-term>mid-pregnant<n-term>progesterone<n-term>vascular smooth muscle<n-term><newabs>21835952<newchar>Sprouting angiogenesis is associated with extensive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The molecular mechanisms involved in building the vascular microenvironment and its impact on capillary formation remain elusive. We therefore performed a proteomic analysis of ECM from endothelial cells maintained in hypoxia, a major stimulator of angiogenesis. Here, we report the characterization of lysyl oxidase-like protein-2 (LOXL2) as a hypoxia-target expressed in neovessels and accumulated in the endothelial ECM. LOXL2 belongs to the lysyl oxidase family of secreted enzymes involved in ECM crosslinking. Knockdown experiments in Tg(fli1:egfp)y1 zebrafish embryos resulted in lack of intersegmental vessel circulation and demonstrated LOXL2 involvement in proper capillary formation. Further investigation in vitro by loss and gain of function experiments confirmed that LOXL2 was required for tubulogenesis in 3D fibrin gels and demonstrated that this enzyme was required for collagen IV assembly in the ECM. In addition, LOXL2 depletion down-regulated cell migration and proliferation. These data suggest a major role for LOXL2 in the organization of endothelial basal lamina and in the downstream mechanotransductive signaling. Altogether, our study provides the first evidence for the role of LOXL2 in regulating angiogenesis through collagen IV scaffolding.<newchar><newabs>24549279<newchar>In the cardiac microenvironment, cardiomyocytes (CMs) are embedded in an aligned and structured extracellular matrix (ECM) to maintain the coordinated contractile function of the heart. The cardiac fibroblast (cFB) is the main cell type responsible for producing and remodeling this matrix. In cardiac diseases, however, adverse remodeling and CM death may lead to deterioration of the aligned myocardial structure. Here, we present an in vitro cardiac model system with uniaxial and biaxial constraints to induce (an)isotropy in 3D microtissues, thereby mimicking 'healthy' aligned and 'diseased' disorganized cardiac matrices. A mixture of neonatal mouse CMs and cFBs was resuspended in a collagen-matrigel hydrogel and seeded to form microtissues to recapitulate the in vivo cellular composition. Matrix disarray led to a stellate cell shape and a disorganized sarcomere organization, while CMs in aligned matrices were more elongated and had aligned sarcomeres. Although matrix disarray has no detrimental effect on the force generated by the CMs, it did have a negative effect on the homogeneity of contraction force distribution. Furthermore, proliferation of the cFBs affected microtissue contraction as indicated by the negative correlation between the percentage of cFBs in the microtissues and their beating frequency. These results suggest that in regeneration of the diseased heart, reorganization of the disorganized matrix will contribute to recover the coordinated contraction but restoring the ratio in cellular composition (CMs and cFBs) is also a prerequisite to completely regain tissue function.<newchar><newabs>23944365<newchar>Traditionally, the studies on cancer growth and progression have been focused on the transformed, malignant cells. However, it is now well recognized that the tumour stroma represents a crucial parameter in tumour development, growth and progression. Indeed, several cancers are characterized by a prominent stromal compartment and it is the interactions between cancer cells, stromal cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) components that control the overall tumour growth. Among stromal cells, fibroblasts represent the most important type. They are responsible for deposition and remodeling of ECM components, as well as for the release of cytokines and growth factors, including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), acting in a paracrine manner on cancer cells. In this review we elucidate the role of tumor stroma interactions, the roles of PDGF receptor signaling in cancer-associated fibroblasts via alteration of stromal matrix composition and the mitogenic effects of cancer-derived PDGFs. Focus on the targeting of tumor microenvironment at the level of PDGF/PDGF receptor (PDGFR) is also presented as to stimulate further studies for designing and development of novel pharmaceutical agents and combined pharmaceutical interventions. Conclusively, PDGF/PDGFR axis is of paramount importance in the tumour microenvironment context and the inhibition of PDGF receptors' activation represents a major target for future anticancer therapies.<newchar><newabs>25605934<newchar>Cell-generated forces produce a variety of tissue movements and tissue shape changes. The cytoskeletal elements that underlie these dynamics act at cell-cell and cell-ECM contacts to apply local forces on adhesive structures. In epithelia, force imbalance at cell contacts induces cell shape changes, such as apical constriction or polarized junction remodeling, driving tissue morphogenesis. The dynamics of these processes are well-characterized; however, the mechanical basis of cell shape changes is largely unknown because of a lack of mechanical measurements in vivo. We have developed an approach combining optical tweezers with light-sheet microscopy to probe the mechanical properties of epithelial cell junctions in the early Drosophila embryo. We show that optical trapping can efficiently deform cell-cell interfaces and measure tension at cell junctions, which is on the order of 100 pN. We show that tension at cell junctions equilibrates over a few seconds, a short timescale compared with the contractile events that drive morphogenetic movements. We also show that tension increases along cell interfaces during early tissue morphogenesis and becomes anisotropic as cells intercalate during germ-band extension. By performing pull-and-release experiments, we identify time-dependent properties of junctional mechanics consistent with a simple viscoelastic model. Integrating this constitutive law into a tissue-scale model, we predict quantitatively how local deformations propagate throughout the tissue.<newchar>Myosin-II<n-term>cell mechanics<n-term>light-sheet microscopy<n-term>optical tweezers<n-term>tissue morphogenesis<n-term><newabs>22239634<newchar>Due to the very limited ability of cardiac tissue to self-regenerate, the replacement of damaged cardiomyocytes and the repair of damaged extracellular matrix (ECM) are highly sought-after therapeutic strategies. Cell transplantation in ECM scaffolds has been shown to improve retention, phenotype, and function in vascular and muscle repair. In addition to cellular patches that involve the use of biomaterial scaffolds in combination with cells, acellular patches may have a role in intrinsically recruiting cells to damaged areas. This review focuses on the clinically relevant ECM scaffolds, their interactions with cells to stimulate functions such as adhesion, migration, proliferation, and differentiation, and their intrinsic role in ECM remodeling leading to vascular and possibly myocardial repair.<newchar><newabs>25226160<newchar>Dysfunctional pulmonary homeostasis and repair, including diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis (PF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and tumorigenesis have been increasing over the past decade, a fact that heavily implicates environmental influences. Several investigations have suggested that in response to increased transforming growth factor--beta (TGFβ) signaling, the alveolar type II (ATII) epithelial cell undergoes phenotypic changes that may contribute to the complex pathobiology of PF. We have previously demonstrated that increased tissue stiffness associated with PF is a potent extracellular matrix (ECM) signal for epithelial cell activation of TGFβ. The work reported here explores the relationship between tissue stiffness and exposure to environmental stimuli in the activation of TGFβ. We hypothesized that exposure of ATII cells to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) will result in enhanced cell contractility, TGFβ activation, and subsequent changes to ATII cell phenotype. ATII cells were cultured on increasingly stiff substrates with or without addition of PM2.5. Exposure to PM2.5 resulted in increased activation of TGFβ, increased cell contractility, and elongation of ATII cells. Most notably, on 8 kPa substrates, a stiffness greater than normal but less than established fibrotic lung, addition of PM2.5 resulted in increased cortical cell stiffness, enhanced actin staining and cell elongation; a result not seen in the absence of PM2.5. Our work suggests that PM2.5 exposure additionally enhances the existing interaction between ECM stiffness and TGFβ that has been previously reported. Furthermore, we show that this additional enhancement is likely a consequence of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to increased TGFβ signaling events. These results highlight the importance of both the micromechanical and biochemical environment in lung disease initiation and suggest that individuals in early stages of lung remodeling during fibrosis may be more susceptible than healthy individuals when exposed to environmental injury adjuvants.<newchar><newabs>24285720<newchar>Progesterone supplementation is recommended to prevent preterm birth in women with a short cervix, but the mechanism is unclear. We hypothesize that progesterone acts by altering the composition of the cervical extracellular matrix (ECM). We tested this hypothesis using human cervical fibroblasts in both two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) cultures. For 2D culture, cells were seeded in 6-well plates and cultured with media supplemented with estradiol (10(-8) M), progesterone (10(-7) or 10(-6) M), and vehicle. For 3D culture, the cells were cultured on a porous silk protein scaffold system. Progesterone and estrogen receptors were documented by immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. In both 2D and 3D cultures, decreased collagen synthesis was seen with increased progesterone concentration. Three-dimensional cultures could be maintained significantly longer than 2D cultures, and the morphology of 3D cultures appeared similar to native cervical tissue. Thus, further studies were performed in 3D culture. To determine the effect of progesterone concentration, the 3D scaffolds were cultured with estradiol (10(-8) M) and five conditions: vehicle; 10(-9), 10(-8), or 10(-7) M progesterone; or 10(-7) M progesterone plus 10(-6) M mifepristone. The highest progesterone concentration correlated with the least amount of collagen synthesis. Collagen synthesis progressively increased as progesterone concentration decreased. This effect was partially antagonized by mifepristone, suggesting the mechanism is mediated by the progesterone receptor. This hormonally responsive 3D culture system supports the hypothesis that progesterone has a direct effect on remodeling cervical ECM during pregnancy. The 3D culture system could be useful for studying the mechanism of progesterone effects on the cervix.<newchar>cervix<n-term>human<n-term>pregnancy<n-term>preterm birth<n-term>progesterone<n-term><newabs>24657485<newchar>Pulmonary inflammation and tissue remodelling are common elements of chronic respiratory diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and pulmonary hypertension (PH). In disease, pulmonary mesenchymal cells not only contribute to tissue remodelling, but also have an important role in pulmonary inflammation. This review will describe the immunomodulatory functions of pulmonary mesenchymal cells, such as airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells and lung fibroblasts, in chronic respiratory disease. An important theme of the review is that pulmonary mesenchymal cells not only respond to inflammatory mediators, but also produce their own mediators, whether pro-inflammatory or pro-resolving, which influence the quantity and quality of the lung immune response. The notion that defective pro-inflammatory or pro-resolving signalling in these cells potentially contributes to disease progression is also discussed. Finally, the concept of specifically targeting pulmonary mesenchymal cell immunomodulatory function to improve therapeutic control of chronic respiratory disease is considered.<newchar>Cell adhesion molecule (CAM)<n-term>Chemokine<n-term>Cytokine<n-term>Extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>Macrophage<n-term>Mast cell<n-term><newabs>25839195<newchar>Oral leukoplakia is a morphological alteration of tissue that is an early indicator for malignancy. Tenascin (TN) is a large hexameric extracellular matrix (ECM) protein with anti-adhesive properties that fosters cell migration during development, wound healing and tissue remodeling; it is present in small amounts in adult tissues. Overexpression of TN in a pathological condition may be either a cause or a consequence of the disease. We evaluated the efficacy of TN for early prediction of tobacco-associated oral cancers. We studied retrospectively 95 cases of oral leukoplakia, including mild, moderate and severe cases, using immunohistochemistry for TN. We evaluated the intensity, area and pattern of TN expression. Greater intensity and area of TN expression was observed in mild and severe dysplasia than in moderate dysplasia. Most cases showed a reticular pattern of expression, especially in mild and moderate dysplasia; a fibrillar pattern was more evident in severe dysplasia. We also observed homogeneous expression pattern in some cases. TN is a marker for dysplastic changes in epithelium and its expression may be helpful for predicting the malignancy potential of tobacco-associated oral leukoplakia.<newchar>dysplasia<n-term>immunohistochemistry<n-term>oral leukoplakia<n-term>tenascin<n-term><newabs>23841813<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) and breakdown of blood-brain barrier (BBB) are crucial events in the pathogenesis of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), particularly MMP-9 and MMP-2, are the most important degrading enzymes in the ECM and BBB. These proteolytic effects are controlled predominantly by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). TIMP-1 is the main endogenous inhibitor of MMP-9. Two polymorphisms in the TIMP-1 gene (rs4898 and rs2070584) were selected through a literature review and successfully genotyped in a study sample of 410 ICH patients and 305 controls. Differences in genotype and allele frequencies of identified polymorphisms were determined. Furthermore, the serum levels of TIMP-1 were measured in a subgroup of 96 ICH patients on days 1 after ICH onset and 76 controls. Analyses showed that C allele of rs2070584 was significantly associated with the development of ICH in male subjects (p = 0.037, OR = 1.535, 95%CI 1.025-2.300). Multiple logistic regression analysis under three genetic models demonstrated both rs4898 and rs2070584 were not risk factors for ICH in female subjects. Furthermore, serum levels of TIMP-1 were significantly higher in ICH patients than those in normal controls. However, the serum levels of TIMP-1 showed a nonsignificant decrease, depending on the alleles and genotypes of rs2070584 both in male and female cases. In conclusion, this is the first association study of the TIMP-1 gene variants with ICH. Our data suggest that C allele of rs2070584 is a risk factor for ICH development in the Chinese male population. However, the precise function of this variant needs further investigation.<newchar><newabs>23085993<newchar>Hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for osteoporotic fractures. Homocysteine (Hcys) inhibits collagen cross-linking and consequently decreases bone extracellular matrix (ECM) quality. Serum amyloid A (A-SAA), an acute-phase protein family, plays an important role in chronic and inflammatory diseases and up-regulates MMP13, which plays an important role in bone development and remodeling. Here, we investigate the effect of Hcys on expression of SAA3, a member of the A-SAA gene family, in osteoblasts characterizing underlying mechanisms and possible consequences on bone metabolism. MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells were cultured up to 21 d with Hcys (low millimolar range) or reseeded onto ECM resulting from untreated or Hcys-treated MC3T3-E1 cells. Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy and a discriminative antibody were used to characterize the resulting ECM. Gene expression and signaling pathways were analyzed by gene chip, quantitative RT-PCR, and immunoblotting. Transcriptional regulation of Saa3 was studied by promoter transfection assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence microscopy. Hcys treatment resulted in reduced collagen cross-linking, uncovering of RGD-motifs, and activation of the PTK2-PXN-CTNNB1 pathway followed by RELA activation. These signaling events led to increased SAA3 expression followed by the production of MMP13 and several chemokines, including Ccl5, Ccl2, Cxcl10, and Il6. Our data suggest Saa3 as link between hyperhomocysteinemia and development of osteoporosis.<newchar><newabs>23910415<newchar>Heart failure after a myocardial infarction continues to be a leading killer in the Western world. Currently, there are no therapies that effectively prevent or reverse the cardiac damage and negative left ventricular remodeling process that follows a myocardial infarction. Because the heart has limited regenerative capacity, there has been considerable effort to develop new therapies that could repair and regenerate the myocardium. Although cell transplantation alone was initially studied, more recently, tissue engineering strategies using biomaterial scaffolds have been explored. In this review, we cover the different approaches to engineering the myocardium, including cardiac patches, which are in vitro-engineered constructs of functional myocardium, and injectable scaffolds, which can either encourage endogenous repair and regeneration or act as vehicles to support the delivery of cells and other therapeutics.<newchar>ECM<n-term>EHT<n-term>ESC<n-term>HA<n-term>LV<n-term>MI<n-term>MeHA<n-term>PSC<n-term>VEGF<n-term>bFGF<n-term>basic fibroblast growth factor<n-term>embryonic stem cell<n-term>engineered heart tissue<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hESC<n-term>human embryonic stem cell<n-term>hyaluronic acid<n-term>iPSC<n-term>induced pluripotent stem cell<n-term>left ventricular<n-term>methacrylated hyaluronic acid<n-term>myocardial infarction<n-term>pluripotent stem cells<n-term>vascular endothelial growth factor<n-term><newabs>26509154<newchar>The intricate process of wound healing involves activation of biological pathways that work in concert to regenerate a tissue microenvironment consisting of cells and external cellular matrix (ECM) with enzymes, cytokines, and growth factors. Distinct stages characterize the mammalian response to tissue injury: hemostasis, inflammation, new tissue formation, and tissue remodeling. Hemostasis and inflammation start right after the injury, while the formation of new tissue, along with migration and proliferation of cells within the wound site, occurs during the first week to ten days after the injury. In this review paper, we discuss approaches in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine to address each of these processes through the application of biomaterials, either as support to the native microenvironment or as delivery vehicles for functional hemostatic, antibacterial, or anti-inflammatory agents. Molecular therapies are also discussed with particular attention to drug delivery methods and gene therapies. Finally, cellular treatments are reviewed, and an outlook on the future of drug delivery and wound care biomaterials is provided.<newchar><newabs>22215527<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts (CF) play a key role in orchestrating the structural remodeling of the myocardium in response to injury or stress, in part through direct regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of over 25 zinc-dependent proteases that together have the capacity to degrade all the protein components of the ECM. Fibroblasts are a major source of several MMPs in the heart, thereby representing a viable therapeutic target for regulating ECM turnover in cardiac pathologies characterized by adverse remodeling, such as myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, hypertension and heart failure. This review summarizes current knowledge on the identity and regulation of MMPs expressed by CF and discusses future directions for reducing adverse myocardial remodeling by modulating the expression and/or activity of CF-derived MMPs.<newchar><newabs>10082755<newchar>Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) and an alternatively spliced fibronectin (Fn)-EIIIA isoform are adhesive proteins associated with embryogenesis and tissue remodeling. We compared, by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, the course of TSP-1 and Fn-EIIIA expression in a model of glomerulonephritis induced by Habu snake venom (HV) and characterized by mesangial cell migration, proliferation, and extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis. At 24 hr after HV, TSP-1 and Fn-EIIIA proteins localized in the central aspects of lesions associated with platelets and macrophages and at the margins of lesions coinciding with mesangial cell migration (determined by Thy-1 staining). Mesangial cells at this time expressed TSP-1 but not Fn-EIIIA mRNA. TSP-1 protein and mRNA peaked in lesions at 48 hr and were associated with cell proliferation (determined by PCNA, alpha-smooth muscle actin phenotype, and expression of beta-PDGF receptor mRNA). TSP-1 expression declined at 72 hr when expression of ECM synthesis peaked, as determined by increased expression of collagen Type IV, laminin, and TGF-beta1 protein and mRNA. Mesangial cell expression of Fn-EIIIA was first observed at 48 hr and was most abundant at 72 hr after HV. Therefore, platelet- and macrophage-derived Fn-EIIIA and TSP-1 in early lesions are associated with mesangial cell migration. Mesangial cell upregulation of TSP-1 is associated with migration and proliferation but not maximal ECM accumulation, whereas mesangial cell expression of Fn-EIIIA is associated with proliferation and ECM accumulation. These results suggest distinctive temporal and spatial roles for TSP-1 and Fn-EIIIA in remodeling during glomerular disease. (J Histochem Cytochem 47:533-543, 1999)<newchar><newabs>25699257<newchar>The dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumor to a distant site, known as metastasis, is the main cause of mortality in cancer patients. Metastasis is a very complex cellular process that involves many steps, including the breaching of the basement membrane (BM) to allow the movement of cells through tissues. The BM breach occurs via highly regulated and localized remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which is mediated by formation of structures, known as invadopodia, and targeted secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Recently, invadopodia have emerged as key cellular structures that regulate the metastasis of many cancers. Furthermore, targeting of various cytoskeletal modulators and MMPs has been shown to play a major role in regulating invadopodia function. Here, we highlight recent findings regarding the regulation of protein targeting during invadopodia formation and function.<newchar>MMP2<n-term>MMP9<n-term>Rab40B<n-term>cancer<n-term>invadopodia<n-term>membrane traffic<n-term>metastasis<n-term><newabs>25477895<newchar>Modern green algae constitute a large and diverse taxonomic assemblage that encompasses many multicellular phenotypes including colonial, filamentous, and parenchymatous forms. In all multicellular green algae, each cell is surrounded by an extracellular matrix (ECM), most often in the form of a cell wall. Volvocalean taxa like Volvox have an elaborate, gel-like, hydroxyproline rich glycoprotein covering that contains the cells of the colony. In &quot;ulvophytes,&quot; uronic acid-rich and sulfated polysaccharides are the likely adhesion agents that maintain the multicellular habit. Charophytes also produce polysaccharide-rich cell walls and in late divergent taxa, pectin plays a critical role in cell adhesion in the multicellular complex. Cell walls are products of coordinated interaction of membrane trafficking, cytoskeletal dynamics and the cell's signal transduction machinery responding both to precise internal clocks and external environmental cues. Most often, these activities must be synchronized with the secretion, deposition and remodeling of the polymers of the ECM. Rapid advances in molecular genetics, cell biology and cell wall biochemistry of green algae will soon provide new insights into the evolution and subcellular processes leading to multicellularity.<newchar>cell wall<n-term>cytokinesis<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glycoprotein<n-term>multicellularity<n-term>pectin<n-term><newabs>26583135<newchar>In recent years the role of tumor microenvironment in the progression of hematological malignancies has been widely recognized. Recent studies have focused on how cancer cells communicate within the microenvironment. Among several factors (cytokines, growth factors, and ECM molecules), a key role has been attributed to extracellular vesicles (EV), released from different cell types. EV (microvesicles and exosomes) may affect stroma remodeling, host cell functions, and tumor angiogenesis by inducing gene expression modulation in target cells, thus promoting cancer progression and metastasis. Microvesicles and exosomes can be recovered from the blood and other body fluids of cancer patients and contain and deliver genetic and proteomic contents that reflect the cell of origin, thus constituting a source of new predictive biomarkers involved in cancer development and serving as possible targets for therapies. Moreover, due to their specific cell-tropism and bioavailability, EV can be considered natural vehicles suitable for drug delivery. Here we will discuss the recent advances in the field of EV as actors in hematological cancer progression, pointing out the role of these vesicles in the tumor-host interplay and in their use as biomarkers for hematological malignancies.<newchar><newabs>21907443<newchar>Viral myocarditis is a life-threatening disease characterized by severe cardiac inflammation that can result in heart failure or sudden cardiac death in previously healthy adults. In a subset of patients, it may result in the development of dilated cardiomyopathy due to the chronic inflammatory process. Despite its clinical need, specific treatments for myocarditis are currently not available. The extracellular matrix (ECM) under normal conditions, functions to maintain the mechanical and structural integrity of the heart but can adapt under pathological circumstances to preserve cardiac function. Recent studies have revealed a crucial role of the ECM in the reparative process after cardiac insult, not only as a key component in cardiac remodeling but also as a regulator of the inflammatory process. Increasing our understanding of the impact the ECM has in the disease pathogenesis and progression of viral myocarditis, might lead to much needed therapeutic interventions. In this review we will describe the pathology of viral myocarditis and illustrate the interplay between inflammation and the ECM in general terms, and during viral myocarditis.<newchar><newabs>15723438<newchar>During liver regeneration, hepatocytes proliferate under the control of both proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) and growth factors, in parallel to extracellular matrix remodeling. This study investigated mechanisms by which mitogen and extracellular matrix signals are linked for inducing proliferation of differentiated hepatocytes. The authors used adult rat hepatocytes in coculture with liver biliary cells, because cells are stably differentiated for several weeks, capable of extracellular matrix deposition, and unable to divide in response to growth factor alone. This work demonstrated that hepatocytes could undergo several proliferation waves without loss of differentiation by using alternating periods of TNFalpha/growth factor stimulation and deprivation. Three days after stimulation with TNFalpha and epidermal growth factor (EGF), up to 35% of hepatocytes divided. Demonstration was also provided that EGF alone only promoted cell progression up to late G(1), whereas TNFalpha was necessary for G(1)/S transition and Cdk1 induction. TNFalpha promoted an extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation that involved the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-9 induction through activation of NF-kappaB pathway. Finally, the authors showed that ECM remodeling signal was required for initiating any new hepatocyte division wave, in presence of mitogen. In conclusion, these results highlight that hepatocyte division is dependent on ECM deposition associated with differentiation status, and that ECM degradation signal is critical in controlling G(1)/S transition and Cdk1 induction. These results provide new insights for understanding the unique hepatocyte proliferation control and improving regeneration in patients suffering from liver damage.<newchar><newabs>25157350<newchar>Tumors and wounds share many similarities including loss of tissue architecture, cell polarity and cell differentiation, aberrant extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling (Ballard et al., 2006) increased inflammation, angiogenesis, and elevated cell migration and proliferation. Whereas these changes are transient in repairing wounds, tumors do not regain tissue architecture but rather their continued progression is fueled in part by loss of normal tissue structure. As a result tumors are often described as wounds that do not heal. The ECM component hyaluronan (HA) and its receptor RHAMM have both been implicated in wound repair and tumor progression. This review highlights the similarities and differences in their roles during these processes and proposes that RHAMM-regulated wound repair functions may contribute to &quot;cancerization&quot; of the tumor microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>23764371<newchar>Intra- and extracellular adenosine levels rise in response to physiological stimuli and with metabolic/energetic perturbations, inflammatory challenge and tissue injury. Extracellular adenosine engages members of the G-protein coupled adenosine receptor (AR) family to mediate generally beneficial acute and adaptive responses within all constituent cells of the heart. In this way the four AR sub-types-A1, A2A, A2B, and A3Rs-regulate myocardial contraction, heart rate and conduction, adrenergic control, coronary vascular tone, cardiac and vascular growth, inflammatory-vascular cell interactions, and cellular stress-resistance, injury and death. The AR sub-types exert both distinct and overlapping effects, and may interact in mediating these cardiovascular responses. The roles of the ARs in beneficial modulation of cardiac and vascular function, growth and stress-resistance render them attractive therapeutic targets. However, interactions between ARs and with other receptors, and their ubiquitous distribution throughout the body, can pose a challenge to the implementation of site- and target-specific AR based pharmacotherapy. This review outlines cardiovascular control by adenosine and the AR family in health and disease, including interactions between AR sub-types within the heart and vessels.<newchar>ADP<n-term>AMP<n-term>ANP<n-term>AR<n-term>ATP<n-term>ATP-gated K(+) channel<n-term>AV<n-term>Adenosine receptors<n-term>Angiogenesis<n-term>CRE<n-term>Cardioprotection<n-term>Contractility<n-term>ECM<n-term>G-protein coupled receptor<n-term>GPCR<n-term>HIF<n-term>Heart rate<n-term>IFN<n-term>IL-<n-term>IMP<n-term>K(ATP)<n-term>MMP<n-term>NO<n-term>P(i)<n-term>PI3K<n-term>PKC<n-term>PostCon<n-term>PreCon<n-term>Remodeling<n-term>SA<n-term>TNFα<n-term>UTR<n-term>VEGF<n-term>adenosine diphosphate<n-term>adenosine monophosphate<n-term>adenosine receptor<n-term>adenosine triphosphate<n-term>atrial natriuretic peptide<n-term>atrioventricular<n-term>cAMP response element<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hypoxia inducible factor<n-term>inorganic phosphate<n-term>inosine monophosphate<n-term>interferon<n-term>interleukin<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>nitric oxide<n-term>phosphoinositide 3-kinase<n-term>postconditioning<n-term>preconditioning<n-term>protein kinase C<n-term>sinoatrial<n-term>tumor necrosis factor α<n-term>untranslated region<n-term>vascular endothelial growth factor<n-term><newabs>18716372<newchar>The left ventricle (LV) remodels with age and in response to pressure overload. While aging and pressure overload are superimposed in the clinical context, the structural and functional consequences of the individual processes are not well-understood. Accordingly, the objective of this study was to compare the effects of both early and late chronic hypertension on extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The following groups of Dahl rats were studied: 1) young salt-resistant (control, n=6); 2) young salt-sensitive (early phase of chronic hypertension, n=6); 3) middle-aged salt-resistant (aging, n=5); and 4) middle-aged salt-sensitive (late phase of chronic hypertension, n=6). We measured LV mass (LVM) and body weight (BW) and immunoblotted a panel of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), and ECM proteins. Total collagen increased, several MMPs decreased, and TIMP-1 increased in the early phase of hypertension, consistent with fibrosis. Active MMP-8 decreased from 8,010+/-81 U in young salt-resistant to 5,260+/-313 U in young salt-sensitive (p&lt;0.05) rats. During the late phase, chronic hypertension decreased total collagen levels and increased MMP-8 and MMP-14 (all p&lt;0.05). Based on good-fit modeling analysis, MMP-14 (45 kDa) correlated positively with changes in LVM/BW during the early phase. In conclusion, this is the first study to evaluate MMP levels during both early and late chronic phases of hypertension. Our results highlight that ECM remodeling in response to pressure overload is a dynamic process involving excessive ECM accumulation and degradation.<newchar><newabs>15102440<newchar>Endochondral ossification, the process by which most of the skeleton is formed, is a powerful system for studying various aspects of the biological response to degraded extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, the dependence of endochondral ossification upon neovascularization and continuous ECM remodeling provides a good model for studying the role of the matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) not only as simple effectors of ECM degradation but also as regulators of active signal-inducers for the initiation of endochondral ossification. The daunting task of elucidating their specific role during endochondral ossification has been facilitated by the development of mice deficient for various members of this family. Here, we discuss the ECM and its remodeling as one level of molecular regulation for the process of endochondral ossification, with special attention to the MMPs.<newchar><newabs>25729860<newchar>The characteristics of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), such as proportion and multilineage potential, can be affected by donor age. However, the qualitative and quantitative features of ACL MSCs isolated from younger and older individuals have not yet been compared directly. This study assessed the phenotypic and functional differences in ACL-MSCs isolated from younger and older donors and evaluated the correlation between ACL-MSC proportion and donor age. Torn ACL remnants were harvested from 36 patients undergoing ACL reconstruction (young: 29.67 ± 10.92 years) and 33 undergoing TKA (old: 67.96 ± 5.22 years) and the proportion of their MSCs were measured. The mean proportion of MSCs was slightly higher in older ACL samples of the TKA group than of the younger ACL reconstruction group (19.69 ± 8.57% vs. 15.33 ± 7.49%, p = 0.024), but the proportions of MSCs at passages 1 and 2 were similar. MSCs from both groups possessed comparable multilineage potentiality, as they could be differentiated into adipocytes, osteocytes, and chondrocytes at similar level. No significant correlations were observed between patient age and MSC proportions at passages 0-2 or between age and MSC proportion in both the ACL reconstruction and TKA groups. Multiple linear regression analysis found no significant predictor of MSC proportion including donor age for each passage. Microarray analysis identified several genes that were differentially regulated in ACL-MSCs from old TKA patients compared to young ACL reconstruction patients. Genes of interest encode components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and may thus play a crucial role in modulating tissue homeostasis, remodeling, and repair in response to damage or disease. In conclusion, the proportion of freshly isolated ACL-MSC was higher in elderly TKA patients than in younger patients with ACL tears, but their phenotypic and multilineage potential were comparable.<newchar><newabs>25523234<newchar>Reciprocal interactions between neoplastic cells and their microenvironment are crucial events in carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Pervasive stromal reprogramming and remodeling that transform a normal to a tumorigenic microenvironment modify numerous stromal cells functions, status redox, oxidative stress, pH, ECM stiffness and energy metabolism. These environmental factors allow selection of more aggressive cancer cells that develop important adaptive strategies. Subpopulations of cancer cells acquire new properties associating plasticity, stem-like phenotype, unfolded protein response, metabolic reprogramming and autophagy, production of exosomes, survival to anoikis, invasion, immunosuppression and therapeutic resistance. Moreover, by inducing vascular transdifferentiation of cancer cells and recruiting endothelial cells and pericytes, the tumorigenic microenvironment induces development of tumor-associated vessels that allow invasive cells to gain access to the tumor vessels and to intravasate. Circulating cancer cells can survive in the blood stream by interacting with the intravascular microenvironment, extravasate through the microvasculature and interact with the metastatic microenvironment of target organs. In this review, we will focus on many recent paradigms involved in the field of tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>21740900<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) contains important cues for tissue homeostasis and morphogenesis. The matricellular protein tenascin-C (TN-C) is overexpressed in remodeling tissues and cancer. In the present work, we studied the effect of different ECM-which exhibited a significant diversity in their TN-C content-in endothelial survival, proliferation and tubulogenic differentiation: autologous (endothelial) ECM devoid of TN-C, but bearing large amounts of FN; fibroblast ECM, bearing both high TN-C and FN contents; and finally, glioma-derived matrices, usually poor in FN, but very rich in TN-C. HUVECs initially adhered to the immobilized matrix produced by U373 MG glioma cells, but significantly detached and died by anoikis (50 to 80%) after 24h, as compared with cells incubated with endothelial and fibroblast matrices. Surviving endothelial cells (20 to 50%) became up to 6-fold more proliferative and formed 74-97% less tube-like structures in vitro than cells grown on non-tumoral matrices. An antibody against the EGF-like repeats of tenascin-C (TN-C) partially rescued cells from the tubulogenic defect, indicating that this molecule is responsible for the selection of highly proliferative and tubulogenic defective endothelial cells. Interestingly, by using defined substrata, in conditions that mimic glioma and normal cell ECM composition, we observed that fibronectin (FN) modulates the TN-C-induced selection of endothelial cells. Our data show that TN-C is able to modulate endothelial branching morphogenesis in vitro and, since it is prevalent in matrices of injured and tumor tissues, also suggest a role for this protein in vascular morphogenesis, in these physiological contexts.<newchar><newabs>24044998<newchar>Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have gained increasing research interest for their potential in improving healing and regeneration of injured tendon tissues. Developing functional three-dimensional (3D) scaffolds to promote MSC proliferation and differentiation is a critical requirement in tendon tissue engineering. Tendon extracellular matrix has been shown to maintain the tenogenic potential of tendon stem cells and stimulate tenogenesis of human adipose stem cells (hASCs) in 2D culture. This study aims at characterizing the biological composition of urea-extracted fraction of tendon ECM (tECM) and its tenogenic effect on hASCs cultured in a 3D collagen scaffold under uniaxial tension. The tECM obtained was cell-free and rich in ECM proteins. hASCs seeded in tECM-supplemented scaffold exhibited significantly increased proliferation and tenogenic differentiation. The presence of tECM also greatly suppressed the osteogenic differentiation of hASCs triggered by uniaxial tension. In addition, tECM-supplemented constructs displayed enhanced mechanical strength, accompanied by reduced expression and activity of MMPs in the seeded hASCs, indicating a regulatory activity of tECM in cell-mediated scaffold remodeling. These findings support the utility of tECM in creating bio-functional scaffolds for tendon tissue engineering.<newchar>Adipose stem cells<n-term>Collagen scaffold<n-term>Decellularized matrix<n-term>Tendon regeneration<n-term>Tenogenesis<n-term><newabs>23868588<newchar>Invasion by cancer cells through the extracellular matrix (ECM) of tissues is a critical step in cancer progression and metastasis. Actin-rich subcellular protrusions known as invadopodia are thought to facilitate this process by localizing proteinases which degrade the ECM and allow for cancer cell penetration. We have shown in vitro that invadopodia activity is regulated by the rigidity of the ECM, which suggests that matrix remodeling in vivo may also be regulated by the mechanical properties of tissues. In order to study rigidity effects on invadopodia activity in a controlled manner, we have developed assays in which we have conjugated degradable fluorescent matrix molecules to tunable synthetic substrates. In addition, we have also utilized ex vivo tissue-derived substrates to corroborate our findings. In this chapter, we present detailed protocols describing the synthesis and preparation of our synthetic substrates, polyacrylamide gels and polyurethane elastomers, for use in these matrix degradation assays as well as the steps required to utilize our tissue-derived substrates.<newchar><newabs>17003102<newchar>Adult zebra fish completely regenerate their caudal (tail) fin following partial amputation. Exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) inhibits this regenerative process. Proper regulation of transcription, innervation, vascularization, and extracellular matrix (ECM) composition is essential for complete fin regeneration. Previous microarray studies suggest that genes involved in ECM regulation are misexpressed following activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. To investigate whether TCDD blocks regeneration by impairing ECM remodeling, male zebra fish were i.p. injected with 50 ng/g TCDD or vehicle, and caudal fins were amputated. By 3 days postamputation (dpa), the vascular network in the regenerating fin of TCDD-exposed fish was disorganized compared to vehicle-exposed animals. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining revealed that axonal outgrowth was impacted by TCDD as early as 3 dpa. Histological analysis demonstrated that TCDD exposure leads to an accumulation of collagen at the end of the fin ray just distal to the amputation site by 3 dpa. Mature lepidotrichial-forming cells (fin ray-forming cells) were not observed in the fins of TCDD-treated fish. The capacity to metabolize ECM was also altered by TCDD exposure. Quantitative real-time PCR studies revealed that the aryl hydrocarbon pathway is active and that matrix-remodeling genes are expressed in the regenerate following TCDD exposure.<newchar><newabs>10996511<newchar>Tissue distensibility and extracellular matrix (ECM) including receptor integrins play significant role in the frequency of heart beat, contraction and relaxation. To meet the workload and during compensatory adaptive remodeling, the ECM restructures and transmits nuclear signals to convert fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM), and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) control the activation of ECM remodeling and transmission of nuclear signals. This lead to the replacement of the injured muscle during wound healing in heart failure. The ECM degradation leads to apoptosis in cardiomyocytes.<newchar><newabs>15111304<newchar>Obstructive diseases of blood vessels and the lung are characterized by degradation and synthesis of new extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Regulated remodeling of the ECM in diseases such as atherosclerosis and lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), both characterized by excessive accumulation of smooth muscle cells (SMCs), is thought to be controlled in part by cell surface receptors for specific ECM components. Discoidin domain receptors (DDR) 1 and 2 represent a family of tyrosine kinase collagen receptors that are activated by fibrillar collagens. To test the hypothesis that DDR may be involved in ECM remodeling by SMCs in vivo, we analyzed DDR expression by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry and demonstrate that both DDR1 and DDR2 are up-regulated in nodules of LAM as compared to normal controls, and are expressed in lesions of atherosclerosis. In vitro, retroviral overexpression of DDR1 or DDR2 in human SMCs cultured on polymerized collagen gels leads to a reduction of collagen expression and induces matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 1 at both mRNA and protein levels, but only DDR2 enhances MMP2 activation. Moreover, DDR2 overexpression increases SMC-mediated collagen and elastin degradation in vitro. Using laser microdissection, we extend our studies to the analysis of SMCs from LAM nodules where we observe higher MMP1 expression and MMP2 activation. Taken together, these data provide evidence for the potential roles of DDR1 and DDR2 in the regulation of collagen turnover mediated by SMCs in obstructive diseases of blood vessels and the lung.<newchar><newabs>17635914<newchar>In cardiac fibrosis remodeling of the failing myocardium is associated with a complex reorganization of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Xylosyltransferase I and Xylosyltransferase II (XT-I and XT-II) are the key enzymes in proteoglycan biosynthesis, which are an important fraction of the ECM. XT-I was shown to be a measure for the proteoglycan biosynthesis rate and a biochemical fibrosis marker. Here, we investigated the XT-I and XT-II expression in cardiac fibroblasts and in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and compared our findings with nonfailing donor hearts. We analyzed XT-I and XT-II expression and the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content in human cardiac fibroblasts incubated with transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta(1) or exposed to cyclic mechanical stretch. In vitro and in vivo no significant changes in the XT-II expression were detected. For XT-I we found an increased expression in parallel with an elevated chondroitin sulfate-GAG content after incubation with TGF-beta(1) and after mechanical stretch. XT-I expression and subsequently increased levels of GAGs could be reduced with neutralizing anti-TGF-beta(1) antibodies or by specific inhibition of the activin receptor-like kinase 5 or the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Usage of XT-I small interfering RNA could specifically block the increased XT-I expression under mechanical stress and resulted in a significantly reduced chondroitin sulfate-GAG content. In the left and right ventricular samples of dilated cardiomyopathy patients, our data show increased amounts of XT-I mRNA compared with nonfailing controls. Patients had raised levels of XT-I enzyme activity and an elevated proteoglycan content. Myocardial remodeling is characterized by increased XT-I expression and enhanced proteoglycan deposition. TGF-beta(1) and mechanical stress induce XT-I expression in cardiac fibroblasts and have impact for ECM remodeling in the dilated heart. Specific blocking of XT-I expression confirmed that XT-I catalyzes a rate-limiting step during fibrotic GAG biosynthesis.<newchar><newabs>22917573<newchar>Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease that exhibits airway remodeling with changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM). The role of the ECM in mediating these changes is poorly understood. Hyaluronan (HA), a major component of the ECM, has been implicated in many biological processes in diseases. This study investigates the processes involved in HA synthesis, deposition and localization during the propagation of cockroach-induced asthma. Mice were sensitized and challenged with cockroach antigen, and sacrificed at various time points during an 8-week challenge protocol. Analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid revealed an increase in total nucleated cells as early as 6h, which peaked at 6 days. Histopathologic analysis of the lung tissue revealed an influx of inflammatory cells at the peribronchial and perivascular regions starting at 12 h, which peaked at 6 days and persisted to 8 weeks. Eosinophils predominated in the early time points while lymphocytes predominated during the late time points. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data showed that hyaluronan synthase 1 (HAS1) mRNA peaked within 6 h and then declined. HAS2 mRNA also peaked within 6 h but remained elevated throughout the 8-week exposure course. HA levels in lung tissue and BAL increased at 12 h and peaked by 6 and 8 days, respectively. Inflammatory cells and new collagen formation localized in areas of HA deposition. Taken together, these data support a role for HA in the pathogenesis in asthma.<newchar><newabs>19484778<newchar>Prostate require high levels of steroidogenic enzymes such as 5alpha-reductase (5alpha-r) and Aromatase (Aro) for the formation of active steroids. Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the prostate dominant androgen, is converted from testosterone (T) by the action of 5alpha-r. Aro provides an alternative pathway for estrogen, via T aromatization. Since prostatic maintenance is dependent on both reciprocal stromal-epithelial interaction and regulation by steroids, this study aimed to elucidate what the absence of 5alpha-r and Aro enzymes provokes in the prostate microenvironment after their long-term inhibition. Data obtained 1 day after the 30 consecutive days of enzymatic inhibition with Finasteride (5alpha-r inhibitor) and Letrozole (Aro inhibitor) demonstrated a marked stromal remodeling, with an increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins besides androgen receptor (AR) overexpression in the three phases of postnatal development analyzed. The subepithelial area of acini from ventral prostate presented collagen and reticular fibers accumulation, besides various altered and active fibroblasts. The AR content immunostaining was elevated after enzymatic inhibition therapy, mainly in the nuclei of epithelial cells. Similar data were observed in the ventral prostates even 21 days after the end of treatments. Results obtained following the long-term inhibition of 5alpha-r and Aro are relevant and highlight the actions of these enzymes as crucial not only for the maintenance of tissue architecture and ECM arrangement but also for androgen and AR function. The long-term absence of their action imposes a novel situation on the prostate from which its normal physiology could not be restored by the conclusion of the treatments.<newchar><newabs>16143656<newchar>Cardiac fibroblast (CF) proliferation and differentiation into hypersecretory myofibroblasts can lead to excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) production and cardiac fibrosis. In turn, the ECM produced can potentially activate CFs via distinct feedback mechanisms. To assess how specific ECM components influence CF activation, isolated CFs were plated on specific collagen substrates (type I, III, and VI collagens) before functional assays were carried out. The type VI collagen substrate potently induced myofibroblast differentiation but had little effect on CF proliferation. Conversely, the type I and III collagen substrates did not affect differentiation but caused significant induction of proliferation (type I, 240.7 +/- 10.3%, and type III, 271.7 +/- 21.8% of basal). Type I collagen activated ERK1/2, whereas type III collagen did not. Treatment of CFs with angiotensin II, a potent mitogen of CFs, enhanced the growth observed on types I and III collagen but not on the type VI collagen substrate. Using an in vivo model of myocardial infarction (MI), we measured changes in type VI collagen expression and myofibroblast differentiation after post-MI remodeling. Concurrent elevations in type VI collagen and myofibroblast content were evident in the infarcted myocardium 20-wk post-MI. Overall, types I and III collagen stimulate CF proliferation, whereas type VI collagen plays a potentially novel role in cardiac remodeling through facilitation of myofibroblast differentiation.<newchar><newabs>22226732<newchar>Collagen VI is a major extracellular matrix (ECM) protein with a critical role in maintaining skeletal muscle functional integrity. Mutations in COL6A1, COL6A2 and COL6A3 genes cause Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (UCMD), Bethlem Myopathy, and Myosclerosis. Moreover, Col6a1(-/-) mice and collagen VI deficient zebrafish display a myopathic phenotype. Recently, two additional collagen VI chains were identified in humans, the α5 and α6 chains, however their distribution patterns and functions in human skeletal muscle have not been thoroughly investigated yet. By means of immunofluorescence analysis, the α6 chain was detected in the endomysium and perimysium, while the α5 chain labeling was restricted to the myotendinous junctions. In normal muscle cultures, the α6 chain was present in traces in the ECM, while the α5 chain was not detected. In the absence of ascorbic acid, the α6 chain was mainly accumulated into the cytoplasm of a sub-set of desmin negative cells, likely of interstitial origin, which can be considered myofibroblasts as they expressed α-smooth muscle actin. TGF-β1 treatment, a pro-fibrotic factor which induces trans-differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, increased the α6 chain deposition in the extracellular matrix after addition of ascorbic acid. In order to define the involvement of the α6 chain in muscle fibrosis we studied biopsies of patients affected by Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD). We found that the α6 chain was dramatically up-regulated in fibrotic areas where, in contrast, the α5 chain was undetectable. Our results show a restricted and differential distribution of the novel α6 and α5 chains in skeletal muscle when compared to the widely distributed, homologous α3 chain, suggesting that these new chains may play specific roles in specialized ECM structures. While the α5 chain may have a specialized function in tissue areas subjected to tensile stress, the α6 chain appears implicated in ECM remodeling during muscle fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>21178972<newchar>The regulation of cellular adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for cell migration and ECM remodeling. Focal adhesions are macromolecular assemblies that couple the contractile F-actin cytoskeleton to the ECM. This connection allows for the transmission of intracellular mechanical forces across the cell membrane to the underlying substrate. Recent work has shown the mechanical properties of the ECM regulate focal adhesion and F-actin morphology as well as numerous physiological processes, including cell differentiation, division, proliferation and migration. Thus, the use of cell culture substrates has become an increasingly prevalent method to precisely control and modulate ECM mechanical properties. To quantify traction forces at focal adhesions in an adherent cell, compliant substrates are used in conjunction with high-resolution imaging and computational techniques in a method termed traction force microscopy (TFM). This technique relies on measurements of the local magnitude and direction of substrate deformations induced by cellular contraction. In combination with high-resolution fluorescence microscopy of fluorescently tagged proteins, it is possible to correlate cytoskeletal organization and remodeling with traction forces. Here we present a detailed experimental protocol for the preparation of two-dimensional, compliant matrices for the purpose of creating a cell culture substrate with a well-characterized, tunable mechanical stiffness, which is suitable for measuring cellular contraction. These protocols include the fabrication of polyacrylamide hydrogels, coating of ECM proteins on such gels, plating cells on gels, and high-resolution confocal microscopy using a perfusion chamber. Additionally, we provide a representative sample of data demonstrating location and magnitude of cellular forces using cited TFM protocols.<newchar><newabs>24477730<newchar>Systemic Sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease of multifactorial etiology, triggered by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Its varied clinical expression results from the complex physiopathogenic interaction of three main elements: proliferative vasculopathy, immune dysregulation and abnormal deposition and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), of which the characteristic disease fibrosis is the result. Early physiopathogenic events appear to be endothelial injury and imbalance in vascular repair with the activation of endothelial cells, the immune system and platelets, with the release of multiple mediators such as TH2 proinflammatory cytokines and growth factors, triggering a sequence of simultaneous or cascading events that involve several intracellular signaling pathways. The most important result of these events is the hyperactivation of fibroblasts, the main effector cells of fibrosis, which will then produce large amounts of ECM constituents and secrete multiple growth factors and cytokines that perpetuate the process. In this article we review the main factors potentially involved in the etiology of SSc and reexamine the current knowledge about the most important mechanisms involved in the development of lesions that are characteristic of the disease. A better understanding of these physiopathogenic mechanisms will help identify potential therapeutic targets, which may result in advances in the management of this complex and debilitating disease.<newchar><newabs>24497431<newchar>Nucleus pulposus (NP) is a resilient and hydrophilic tissue which plays a significant role in the biomechanical function of the intervertebral disc (IVD). Destruction of the NP extracellular matrix (ECM) is observed during the early stages of IVD degeneration. Herein, we describe the development and initial characterization of a novel biomaterial which attempts to recreate the resilient and hydrophilic nature of the NP via the construction of a chemically stabilized elastin-glycosaminoglycan-collagen (EGC) composite hydrogel. Results demonstrated that a resilient, hydrophilic hydrogel which displays a unique &quot;shape-memory&quot; sponge characteristic could be formed from a blend of soluble elastin aggregates, chondroitin-6-sulfate, hyaluronic acid and collagen following freeze-drying, stabilization with a carbodiimide and penta-galloyl glucose-based fixative, and subsequent partial degradation with glycosaminoglycan degrading enzymes. The resultant material exhibited the ability to restore its original dimensions and water content following multi-cycle mechanical compression and illustrated resistance to accelerated enzymatic degradation. Preliminary in vitro studies utilizing human adipose derived stem cells (hADSCs) demonstrated that the material was cytocompatible and supported differentiation towards an NP cell-like phenotype. In vivo biocompatibility studies illustrated host cell infiltration and evidence of active remodeling following 4 weeks of implantation. Feasibility studies demonstrated that the EGC hydrogel could be delivered via minimally invasive methods.<newchar>biopolymer<n-term>hydrogel<n-term>nucleus pulposus<n-term>stem cells<n-term>tissue regeneration<n-term><newabs>18783324<newchar>Nondegradable synthetic polymer vascular grafts currently used in cardiovascular surgery have no growth potential. Tissue-engineered vascular grafts (TEVGs) may solve this problem. In this study, we developed a TEVG using autologous bone marrow-derived cells (BMCs) and decellularized tissue matrices, and tested whether the TEVGs exhibit growth potential and vascular remodeling in vivo. Vascular smooth muscle-like cells and endothelial-like cells were differentiated from bone marrow mononuclear cells in vitro. TEVGs were fabricated by seeding these cells onto decellularized porcine abdominal aortas and implanted into the abdominal aortas of 4-month-old, bone marrow donor pigs (n = 4). Eighteen weeks after implantation, the dimensions of TEVGs were measured and compared with those of native abdominal aortas. Expression of molecules associated with vascular remodeling was examined with reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay and immunohistochemistry. Eighteen weeks after implantation, all TEVGs were patent with no sign of thrombus formation, dilatation, or stenosis. Histological and immunohistochemical analyses of the retrieved TEVGs revealed regeneration of endothelium and smooth muscle and the presence of collagen and elastin. The outer diameter of three of the four TEVGs increased in proportion to increases in body weight and outer native aorta diameter. Considerable extents of expression of molecules associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation (i.e., matrix metalloproteinase and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase) and ECM precursors (i.e., procollagen I, procollagen III, and tropoelastin) occurred in the TEVGs, indicating vascular remodeling associated with degradation of exogenous ECMs (implanted decellularized matrices) and synthesis of autologous ECMs. This study demonstrates that the TEVGs with autologous BMCs and decellularized tissue matrices exhibit growth potential and vascular remodeling in vivo of tissue-engineered artery.<newchar><newabs>22345520<newchar>Macrophages play critical roles in events ranging from host defense to obesity and cancer, where they infiltrate affected tissues and orchestrate immune responses in tandem with the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Despite the dual roles played by macrophages in inflammation, the functions of macrophage-derived proteinases are typically relegated to tissue-invasive or -degradative events. Here we report that the membrane-tethered matrix metalloenzyme MT1-MMP not only serves as an ECM-directed proteinase, but unexpectedly controls inflammatory gene responses wherein MT1-MMP(-/-) macrophages mount exaggerated chemokine and cytokine responses to immune stimuli both in vitro and in vivo. MT1-MMP modulates inflammatory responses in a protease-independent fashion in tandem with its trafficking to the nuclear compartment, where it triggers the expression and activation of a phosphoinositide 3-kinase δ (PI3Kδ)/Akt/GSK3β signaling cascade. In turn, MT1-MMP-dependent PI3Kδ activation regulates the immunoregulatory Mi-2/NuRD nucleosome remodeling complex that is responsible for controlling macrophage immune response. These findings identify a novel role for nuclear MT1-MMP as a previously unsuspected transactivator of signaling networks central to macrophage immune responses.<newchar><newabs>23886837<newchar>Establishment and stabilization of endothelial tubes with patent lumens is vital during vertebrate development. Ras-interacting protein 1 (RASIP1) has been described as an essential regulator of de novo lumenogenesis through modulation of endothelial cell (EC) adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we show that in mouse and zebrafish embryos, Rasip1-deficient vessels transition from an angioblast cord to a hollow tube, permit circulation of primitive erythrocytes, but ultimately collapse, leading to hemorrhage and embryonic lethality. Knockdown of RASIP1 does not alter EC-ECM adhesion, but causes cell-cell detachment and increases permeability of EC monolayers in vitro. We also found that endogenous RASIP1 in ECs binds Ras-related protein 1 (RAP1), but not Ras homolog gene family member A or cell division control protein 42 homolog. Using an exchange protein directly activated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate 1 (EPAC1)-RAP1-dependent model of nascent junction formation, we demonstrate that a fraction of the RASIP1 protein pool localizes to cell-cell contacts. Loss of RASIP1 phenocopies loss of RAP1 or EPAC1 in ECs by altering junctional actin organization, localization of the actin-bundling protein nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIB, and junction remodeling. Our data show that RASIP1 regulates the integrity of newly formed blood vessels as an effector of EPAC1-RAP1 signaling.<newchar><newabs>25151982<newchar>Thermosensitive liposomes have emerged as a viable strategy for localized delivery and triggered release of chemotherapy. MR-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) has the capability of heating tumors in a controlled manner, and when combined with thermosensitive liposomes can potentially reduce tumor burden in vivo. However, the impact of this drug delivery strategy has rarely been investigated. We have developed a unique liposome formulation modified with p(NIPAAm-co-PAA), a polymer that confers sensitivity to both temperature and pH. These polymer-modified thermosensitive liposomes (PTSL) demonstrated sensitivity to focused ultrasound, and required lower thermal doses and were more cytotoxic than traditional formulations in vitro. A set of acoustic parameters characterizing optimal release from PTSL in vitro was applied in the design of a combined MRgFUS/PTSL delivery platform. This platform more effectively reduced tumor burden in vivo when compared to free drug and traditional formulations. Histological analysis indicated greater tumor penetration, more extensive ECM remodeling, and greater cell destruction in tumors administered PTSL, correlating with improved response to the therapy.<newchar>Chemotherapy<n-term>Drug delivery<n-term>MR-guided focused ultrasound<n-term>NIPAAm<n-term>Smart polymers<n-term>Thermosensitive liposomes<n-term><newabs>22573892<newchar>How cell cycle machinery regulates extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during cytokinesis remains poorly understood. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the primary septum (PS), a functional equivalent of animal ECM, is synthesized during cytokinesis by the chitin synthase Chs2. Here, we report that Dbf2, a conserved mitotic exit kinase, localizes to the division site after Chs2 and directly phosphorylates Chs2 on several residues, including Ser-217. Both phosphodeficient (chs2-S217A) and phosphomimic (chs2-S217D) mutations cause defects in cytokinesis, suggesting that dynamic phosphorylation-dephosphorylation of Ser-217 is critical for Chs2 function. It is striking that Chs2-S217A constricts asymmetrically with the actomyosin ring (AMR), whereas Chs2-S217D displays little or no constriction and remains highly mobile at the division site. These data suggest that Chs2 phosphorylation by Dbf2 triggers its dissociation from the AMR during the late stage of cytokinesis. Of interest, both chs2-S217A and chs2-S217D mutants are robustly suppressed by increased dosage of Cyk3, a cytokinesis protein that displays Dbf2-dependent localization and also stimulates Chs2-mediated chitin synthesis. Thus Dbf2 regulates PS formation through at least two independent pathways: direct phosphorylation and Cyk3-mediated activation of Chs2. Our study establishes a mechanism for direct cell cycle control of ECM remodeling during cytokinesis.<newchar><newabs>15024713<newchar>The heart remodels myocardial tissue in physiological and pathological response. The cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interaction provides not only structural and mechanical support but also important biological signaling during tissue remodeling. Among various ECM molecules, tenascin-C (TNC) is well known as a regulator of multiple cellular functions during embryogenesis, wound healing or cancer progression. In the heart, TNC appears in several important steps of embryonic development such as the initial differentiation of cardiomyocytes or coronary vasculo/angiogenesis, but it is not detected in a normal adult myocardium. However, TNC is found to re-express after myocardial injury and may regulate cellular behavior during tissue remodeling by modulating the attachment of cardiomyocytes to connective tissue, by enhancing migration and differentiation of myofibroblasts, and by inducing matrix metallo-proteinases. TNC also interacts with other ECM molecules and may modulate progression of fibrosis. Furthermore, transient and site specific expression of TNC closely associated with myocardial injury and inflammation suggests not only its key roles during tissue remodeling but also that TNC can be a marker for myocardial disease activity.<newchar><newabs>17660588<newchar>The combination of long-term hypercapnia and hypoxia decreases pulmonary vascular remodeling and attenuation of right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy. However, there is limited information in the literature regarding the first stages of acclimatization to hypercapnia/hypoxia. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of four-day hypoxia (10% O2) and hypoxia/hypercapnia (10% O2 + 4.4% CO2) on the protein composition of rat myocardium. Expression of the cardiac collagen types and activities of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and of their tissue inhibitor TIMP-1 were followed. The four-day hypoxia changed protein composition of the right ventricle only in the hypercapnic condition; remodeling was observed in the extracellular matrix (ECM) compartments. While the concentrations of pepsin-soluble collagenous proteins in the RV were elevated, the concentrations of pepsin-insoluble proteins were decreased. Furthermore, the four-day hypoxia/hypercapnia increased the synthesis of cardiac collagen due to newly synthesized forms; the amount of cross-linked particles was not affected. This type of hypoxia increased cardiac collagen type III mRNA, while cardiac collagen type I mRNA was decreased. MMP-2 activity was detected on the zymographic gel through appearance of two bands; no differences were observed in either group. mRNA levels for MMP-2 in the RV were significantly lower in both the hypoxic and hypoxic/hypercapnic animals. mRNA levels for TIMP-1 were reduced in the RV of both the hypoxic and hypoxic/hypercapnic animals. Hypoxia with hypercapnia increased the level of mRNA (6.5 times) for the atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) predominantly in the RV. The role of this peptide in remodeling of cardiac ECM is discussed.<newchar><newabs>16456235<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) participate in cardiac remodeling after hypoxic cardiac damage, and remodeling is thought to be mediated by CF synthesis of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). It is unknown whether the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), which mediate cellular signaling for growth and migration, affect BNP synthesis and whether PPARs participate in regulation of extracellular matrix protein (ECM) expression for remodeling. We examined the production of BNP in cultured neonatal ventricular CFs and its signaling system on collagen synthesis and on activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in reoxygenation after hypoxia. BNP mRNA was detected in CFs, and a specific BNP protein, BNP1-32, was secreted into the media. Abundance of collagen I and III was increased in the media at reoxygenation. mRNA and protein levels for MMP-2 and the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 were enhanced in CFs at reoxygenation. These observations also were noted in CFs after incubation with angiotensin II (10 microM) for 24 h. Pretreatment with pioglitaozone (0.1-10 microM) attenuated BNP mRNA and protein abundance of collagen III, MMP-2, and TIMP-1 in CFs at reoxygenation. The secreted BNP was also decreased by pioglitaozone in the media. Furthermore, PPAR activators inhibited reoxygenation-induced activation of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB. These results demonstrate that PPAR activators inhibit BNP synthesis in CFs and imply that PPAR activators may regulate ECM remodeling partially through the NF-kappaB-mediated pathway.<newchar><newabs>18322650<newchar>Electrical, contractile and structural remodeling have been characterized in atrial fibrillation (AF), and the latter is considered to be the major contributor to AF persistence. Recent data show that interstitial fibrosis can predispose to atrial conduction impairment and AF induction. The interplay between cardiac matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors, tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs), is thought to be critical in atrial extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism. At the molecular level, angiotensin II, transforming growth factor-beta1, inflammation and oxidative stress are particularly important for ECM dysregulation and atrial fibrotic remodeling in AF. Therefore, we review recent advances in the understanding of the atrial fibrotic process, the major downstream components in this remodeling process, and the expression and regulation of MMPs and TIMPs. We also describe the activation of bioactive molecules in both clinical studies and animal models to modulate MMPs and TIMPs and their effects on atrial fibrosis in AF.<newchar><newabs>16248781<newchar>Connective tissue remodeling is achieved by a complex process involving several cell types, a plethora of growth factors, cytokines, chemokines and turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM). The main enzymes that degrade ECM molecules are matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their activities are regulated by endogenous inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Recent studies have indicated that endothelins and their receptor expression affects tissue remodeling and repair. Endothelins are rapidly produced by endothelial cells in response to tissue injury and they have potent vasoconstrictive properties. They also promote tissue remodeling through activation of resident connective tissue cells and controlling the production of MMPs and TIMPs by the activated cells. In this review we present the cross-talk between the endothelins and the MMP-TIMP system and their implications in controlling the normal and abnormal tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>11751597<newchar>Remodeling of reproductive organs during pregnancy requires degradation and resynthesis of structural barriers to cell invasion. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes that break down components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and are essential for tissue remodeling processes. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are important regulators of MMP activity. In the pig, relaxin stimulates growth and remodeling of the uterus and cervix during pregnancy, effects that include the ability to alter elements of the ECM. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine whether relaxin alters the production and/or activity of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 in the porcine uterus or cervix. The growth-promoting effects of relaxin were elicited by administering relaxin to prepubertal gilts every 6 h for 54 h. Expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 was characterized by immunoblotting. Total enzyme activity was measured using an MMP-specific fluorescent substrate assay. TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 proteins were present in the uterus and cervix of control and relaxin-treated pigs, and both proteins were increased by relaxin in the uterine flushes and tissues (P &lt; 0.05). Inhibitor activity in uterine tissue extracts and uterine flushes from relaxin-treated animals was greater than that in controls; however, this activity was restricted to inhibition of MMP-2. In the uterine cervix, relaxin enhanced expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 (P &lt; 0.05), whereas expression of both TIMP proteins was similar in the vaginal cervix of control and relaxin-treated animals. Likewise, inhibitor activity against MMP-2 in the uterine cervix was enhanced in response to relaxin (P &lt; 0.05). In contrast, inhibitor activity was attenuated in extracts from the vaginal cervix (P &lt; 0.05). This study highlights the complex nature of MMP/TIMP regulation during reproductive tissue growth and suggests that TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 may be involved in other aspects of the growth process. These data support a role for relaxin in regulating the activity of TIMPs during growth and remodeling of reproductive connective tissue.<newchar><newabs>19041328<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts and myofibroblasts are responsible for post-MI remodeling which occurs via regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Accelerated post-MI remodeling leads to excessive ECM deposition and fibrosis, contributing to impaired contractile function, arrhythmias, and heart failure. We have previously reported that type VI collagen induces myofibroblast differentiation in cultured cardiac fibroblasts, and that type VI collagen and myofibroblast content were both elevated in the myocardium 20 weeks post-MI. The purpose of this study was to determine the expression patterns of type VI collagen and myofibroblast content in early post-myocardial infarction (MI) remodeling to gain insight into whether type VI collagen induces in vivo myofibroblast differentiation via specific matrix-receptor interactions. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were anesthetized and left coronary arteries were permanently ligated. Histological tissue sections and whole tissue protein lysates were obtained from infarcted and non-infarcted areas of MI hearts and sham operated controls. At 3 days post-MI, we observed a significant increase in alpha(3) integrin expression (2.02+/-0.18 fold); at 7 days post-infarction both type VI collagen (2.27+/-0.18 fold) and myofibroblast (4.65+/-0.6 fold) content increased. By 14 days myofibroblast content returned to sham control levels, although type VI collagen (2.42+/-0.11 fold) was still elevated. In vitro cross-linking confirmed that the alpha(3) integrin interacts with type VI collagen, and alpha(3) integrin function blocking antibodies inhibited the differentiation of isolated cardiac fibroblasts. Collectively, our in vitro results indicate that the alpha(3) integrin receptor interacts with type VI collagen to promote myofibroblast differentiation, and that this interaction may impact in vivo post-MI remodeling.<newchar><newabs>24231445<newchar>During pregnancy, the extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invades the maternal decidua and remodels spiral arteries reaching as far as the inner third of the myometrium. This process is mandatory to a successful pregnancy since EVTs regulate spiral artery remodeling to achieve maximal vasodilation and thus an adequate nutrient supply to the embryo or communicate with maternal leukocyte populations to guarantee acceptance of the allogeneic conceptus. To achieve this, EVTs undergo a remarkable and unique differentiation process, which yields different phenotypes such as proliferative cell column trophoblasts or growth-arrested, invasive interstitial or endovascular cytotrophoblasts. Matrix metalloproteinases have long been seen as imperative to trophoblast invasion because of their ability to degrade extracellular matrix and therefore allow cellular movement in foreign tissues. However, global gene expression analysis reveals that EVTs also express various members of distintegrin and metalloproteinases (ADAMs). These proteases are associated with the process of proteolytic shedding and activation of surface proteins including growth factors, cytokines, receptors and their ligands rather than extracellular matrix breakdown. While ADAM12 has been associated with chromosomal abnormalities as well as preeclampsia or intrauterine fetal growth restriction, the function of ADAMs in trophoblasts remains elusive. In this article, we review the diverse invasive trophoblast phenotypes, EVT-associated protease systems and related open questions. In addition, we examine recent information about relevant ADAM members and their putative implications for EVT biology.<newchar>ADAM<n-term>ECM<n-term>EVT subpopulations<n-term>MMP<n-term>Microarray<n-term>Proteases<n-term>Trophoblast invasion<n-term><newabs>10418731<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of extracellular proteases capable of degrading various proteinaceous components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). They have been implicated to play important roles in a number of developmental and pathological processes, such as tumor metastasis and inflammation. Relatively few studies have been carried out to investigate the function of MMPs during postembryonic organ-development. Using Xenopus laevis development as a model system, we demonstrate here that three MMPs, stromelysin-3 (ST3), collagenases-3 (Col3), and Col4, have distinct spatial and temporal expression profiles during metamorphosis as the tadpole transforms into a frog. In situ hybridizations reveal a tight, but distinct, association of individual MMPs with tissue remodeling in the tail and intestine during metamorphosis. In particular, ST3 expression is strongly correlated with apoptosis in both organs as demonstrated by analyses of serial sections with in situ hybridization for ST3 mRNA and TUNEL (terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling) for apoptosis, respectively. On the other hand, Col3 and Col4 are present in regions where extensive connective tissue remodeling take place. These results indicate that ST3 is likely to play a role in ECM-remodeling that facilitate apoptotic tissue remodeling or resorption while Col3 and Col4 appear to participate in connective tissue degradation during development.<newchar><newabs>25368013<newchar>Cardiac valve disease is a significant cause of ill health and death worldwide, and valve replacement remains one of the most common cardiac interventions in high-income economies. Despite major advances in surgical treatment, long-term therapy remains inadequate because none of the current valve substitutes have the potential for remodeling, regeneration, and growth of native structures. Valve development is coordinated by a complex interplay of signaling pathways and environmental cues that cause disease when perturbed. Cardiac valves develop from endocardial cushions that become populated by valve precursor mesenchyme formed by an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The mesenchymal precursors, subsequently, undergo directed growth, characterized by cellular compartmentalization and layering of a structured extracellular matrix (ECM). Knowledge gained from research into the development of cardiac valves is driving exploration into valve biomechanics and tissue engineering directed at creating novel valve substitutes endowed with native form and function.<newchar><newabs>23583521<newchar>Fibrosis underlies the pathogenesis of numerous diseases and leads to severe damage of vital body organs and, frequently, to death. Better understanding of the mechanisms resulting in fibrosis is essential for developing appropriate treatment solutions and is therefore of upmost importance. Recent evidence suggests a significant antifibrotic potential of an integral membrane protein, caveolin-1. While caveolin-1 has been widely studied for its role in the regulation of cell signaling and endocytosis, its possible implication in fibrosis remains largely unclear. In this review we survey involvement of caveolin-1 in various cellular processes and highlight different aspects of its antifibrotic activity. We hypothesize that caveolin-1 conveys a homeostatic function in the process of fibrosis by (a) regulating TGF-β1 and its downstream signaling; (b) regulating critical cellular processes involved in tissue repair, such as migration, adhesion and cellular response to mechanical stress; and (c) antagonizing profibrotic processes, such as proliferation. Finally, we consider this homeostatic function of caveolin-1 as a possible novel approach in treatment of fibroproliferative diseases.<newchar>CSD<n-term>CSD peptide<n-term>Caveolin-1<n-term>ECM<n-term>EGFR<n-term>FAK<n-term>Fibrosis<n-term>IPF<n-term>MEF<n-term>Matrix remodeling<n-term>Mechanotransduction<n-term>TGF-β type I receptor<n-term>TGF-β type II receptor<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>TGFβRI<n-term>TGFβRII<n-term>caveolin scaffolding domain<n-term>epidermal growth factor receptor<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>focal adhesion kinase<n-term>idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis<n-term>mouse embryonic fibroblasts<n-term>pY14-Cav1<n-term>phospho-caveolin<n-term>α-smooth muscle actin<n-term>αSMA<n-term><newabs>21767322<newchar>The accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and glial scar formation are considered important factors for the failure of regeneration in central nervous system (CNS) injury and multiple sclerosis. Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis (TME) as a model of multiple sclerosis served to evaluate the spatio-temporal course of ECM alterations in demyelinating conditions. Microarray analysis revealed only mildly upregulated gene expression of ECM molecules, their biosynthesis pathways and pro-fibrotic factors, while upregulation of matrix remodeling enzymes was more prominent. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated progressive accumulation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, glycoproteins and collagens within demyelinated TME lesions, paralleling the development of astrogliosis. Deposition of collagen IV, laminin, perlecan and tenascin-C started 28 days postinfection (dpi), collagen I, decorin, entactin and neurocan accumulated from 56 dpi on, and fibronectin from 98 dpi on. The basement membrane (BM) molecules collagen IV, entactin, fibronectin, laminin and perlecan showed perivascular and parenchymal deposition, while the non-BM components collagen I, decorin, neurocan and tenascin-C only accumulated in a nonvascular pattern in demyelinated areas. Contrary, phosphacan expression progressively decreased during TME. The immunoreactivity of aggrecan and brevican remained unchanged. The spatio-temporal association of matrix accumulation with astrogliosis suggests a mainly astrocytic origin of ECM deposits, which in turn may contribute to remyelination failure in TME.<newchar><newabs>24269843<newchar>In response to stress or injury the heart undergoes an adverse remodeling process associated with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis. Transformation of cardiac fibroblasts to myofibroblasts is a crucial event initiating the fibrotic process. Cardiac myofibroblasts invade the myocardium and secrete excess amounts of extracellular matrix proteins, which cause myocardial stiffening, cardiac dysfunctions and progression to heart failure. While several studies indicate that the small GTPase RhoA can promote profibrotic responses, the exchange factors that modulate its activity in cardiac fibroblasts are yet to be identified. In the present study, we show that AKAP-Lbc, an A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP) with an intrinsic Rho-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) activity, is critical for activating RhoA and transducing profibrotic signals downstream of type I angiotensin II receptors (AT1Rs) in cardiac fibroblasts. In particular, our results indicate that suppression of AKAP-Lbc expression by infecting adult rat ventricular fibroblasts with lentiviruses encoding AKAP-Lbc specific short hairpin (sh) RNAs strongly reduces the ability of angiotensin II to promote RhoA activation, differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts to myofibroblasts, collagen deposition as well as myofibroblast migration. Interestingly, AT1Rs promote AKAP-Lbc activation via a pathway that requires the α subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein G12. These findings identify AKAP-Lbc as a key Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor modulating profibrotic responses in cardiac fibroblasts.<newchar>A kinase-anchoring protein (AKAP)<n-term>A-kinase anchoring protein<n-term>AKAP<n-term>AT(1)Rs<n-term>AVF<n-term>Ang II<n-term>Cardiac fibroblast<n-term>ECM<n-term>G protein-coupled receptor<n-term>GEF<n-term>GTP<n-term>MRTF<n-term>NVM<n-term>Protein kinase A<n-term>RhoA<n-term>TGF-β<n-term>adult ventricular fibroblast<n-term>angiotensin II<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>guanine nucleotide exchange factor<n-term>guanosine triphosphate<n-term>myocardin related transcription factor<n-term>neonatal ventricular myocyte<n-term>sh<n-term>short hairpin<n-term>transforming growth factor β<n-term>type I angiotensin II receptors<n-term>α-SMA<n-term>α-smooth muscle actin<n-term>α1-ARs<n-term>α1-adrenergic receptors<n-term><newabs>19580809<newchar>The (pro)renin receptor (PRR) is believed to potentiate the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), conferring to prorenin, a likely pathological role at tissue level. The PRR has been identified in the microvascular endothelial cells of the retina, in which it seems to be involved in pathological neovascularization processes. In the present study, we sought to explore PRR expression and prorenin action in human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells, as well as its potential implication in extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. Isolated RPE cells from donor human eyes as well as freshly isolated human retinas demonstrated expression of PRR at mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, we demonstrate that PRR expressed in the RPE cells is functional, as shown by prorenin-induced increases in Erk1/2 phosphorylation. PRR expression was also shown to be regulated by its main physiological agonist prorenin. We found evidence that the PRR may be involved in ECM-remodeling processes through a prorenin-induced upregulation of type I collagen. Immunostaining analysis of human retinas revealed higher PRR and type I collagen expression in the RPE of eye donors with dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and hypertension, supporting the in vitro findings using human-isolated RPE cells. Taken together, the present study demonstrates for the first time that the PRR is expressed in human RPE and suggests a molecular mechanism by which hypertension may exacerbate the pathology of dry AMD.<newchar><newabs>12676546<newchar>The present study tested the hypothesis that cardiac mast cells and chymase are associated with matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation in the evolution of left ventricular (LV) chamber remodeling secondary to experimental mitral regurgitation (MR) in dogs. LV mast cell density, chymase activity, and angiotensin II (ANG II) levels were significantly increased 2 and 4 weeks post-MR, while an increase in angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity was not seen prior to the chronic 24 week stage. As early as 2 and 4 weeks, there was a significant decrease in interstitial myocardial collagen content that was associated with an increase in LV end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) but a normal LVEDD/wall thickness ratio. While mast cell density decreased to normal at 24 weeks, both chymase and MMP-2 activity remained increased throughout the entire 24-week period post-MR. By 24 weeks a transition to an adverse pattern of LV remodeling characterized by a 2-fold increase in the LVEDD/wall thickness ratio had occurred. Thus, this study supports the hypothesis that mast cells and chymase are important modulators of MMP activity and ECM degradation, contributing to adverse LV remodeling in chronic volume overload secondary to MR.<newchar><newabs>22553253<newchar>The methodology for the repair of critical-sized or non-union bone lesions has unpredictable efficacy due in part to our incomplete knowledge of bone repair and the biocompatibility of bone substitutes. Although human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts, which promote bone growth, their ability to repair bone in vivo has been variable. We hypothesized that given the multistage process of osteogenesis, hMSC-mediated repair might be maximal at a specific time point of healing. Using a mouse model of calvarial healing, we demonstrate that the osteo-repair capacity of hMSCs can be substantially augmented by treatment with an inhibitor of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ, but efficacy is confined to the rapid osteogenic phase. Upon entry into the bone-remodeling phase, hMSC retention signals are lost, resulting in truncation of healing. To solve this limitation, we prepared a scaffold consisting of hMSC-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) containing the necessary biomolecules for extended site-specific hMSC retention. When inhibitor-treated hMSCs were coadministered with ECM, they remained at the injury, well into the remodeling phase of healing, which resulted in reproducible and complete repair of critical-sized bone defects in mice in 3 weeks. These data suggest that hMSC-derived ECM and inhibitor-treated hMSCs could be used at optimal times to substantially and reproducibly improve bone repair.<newchar><newabs>23999249<newchar>To date, considerable progress has been made both in the mechanisms driving liver fibrosis and in the prevention of disease progression. Resolution of liver fibrosis is an emerging field in hepatology; yet, the mediators involved remain elusive. Earlier work from our laboratory demonstrated that the matricellular cytokine osteopontin (OPN) is pro-fibrogenic by promoting hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in vitro and in vivo and specifically by governing fibrillar collagen-I expression, the key pro-fibrogenic protein. Here we hypothesized that OPN could also delay the resolution of liver fibrosis by sustaining collagen-I synthesis or by preventing its degradation. To demonstrate this, wild-type (WT) and OPN-knockout (Opn(-/-)) mice were administered thioacetamide (TAA) in the drinking water for 4 months. Half of the mice were killed at 4 months to assess the extent of fibrosis at the peak of injury, and the rest of the mice were killed 2 months after TAA withdrawal to determine the rate of fibrosis resolution. Following TAA cessation, livers from Opn(-/-) mice showed no centrilobular and parenchymal necrosis along with faster ECM remodeling than WT mice. The latter was quantified by less fibrillar collagen-I immunostaining. Western blot analysis demonstrated a significant decrease in fibrillar collagen-I and in tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in Opn(-/-) mice undergoing fibrosis resolution compared with WT mice. In conclusion, these results suggest that OPN delays liver fibrosis resolution due to sustained fibrillar collagen-I deposition; hence, inhibiting OPN could be an effective therapeutic strategy for resolving liver fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>24802761<newchar>Mesangial cells (MCs), vascular smooth muscle-derived cells, contribute to glomerular injury by generating a number of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), regulated by various stimuli, are important in remodeling of glomerular ECM, which leads to a number of renal diseases. We investigated whether TNF-α participated in the regulation of MMPs and explored signal pathways involved in TNF-α-induced MMPs expression in rat glomerular MCs. Western blot and RT-qPCR results showed that treatment with TNF-α significantly increased the expression of MMP-2, but not MMP-9 at both protein and mRNA levels in rat glomerular MCs. The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB) signal pathways were activated by TNF-α. Moreover, the activation of NF-κB pathway in rat MCs was effectively inhibited by PD98059, specific inhibitor of ERK, suggesting a role for ERK in regulating NF-κB function. PD98059 or NF-κB signal pathway selective inhibitor Bay 11-7082 effectively blocked TNF-α-induced expression of MMP-2 in rat MCs, as determined by gene and protein expression. C-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signal pathway had no effect on TNF-α-induced expression of MMP-2, even though it was also activated by TNF-α in rat MCs. Furthermore, TNF-α could induce the cell migration of rat MCs, whereas ERK signal pathway specific inhibitor PD98059 compromised the cell migration triggered by TNF-α. Thus, TNF-α upregulates the expression of MMP-2 via activation of ERK-dependent NF-κB pathway in rat MCs, which may contribute to the cell migration of rat MCs.<newchar>extracellular signal-regulated kinase<n-term>glomerulus<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>mesangial cells<n-term>nuclear factor-kappaB<n-term>tumor necrosis factor-α<n-term><newabs>23511028<newchar>The differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts to myofibroblasts is one of the key events during cardiac remodeling, however, the molecular mechanism underlying this process is not well known. Calcium signaling plays an important role in the regulation of cardiac fibroblast function, but its role in the differentiation of fibroblasts is undefined. Recently four Transient Receptor Potential (TRP) channels TRPM7, TRPC3, TRPC6 and TRPV4 were shown to be crucial for the differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. This addendum sums up the roles described for these four TRP channels in cardiac fibroblast differentiation, and discusses the possible molecular mechanisms underlying this process and its relevance for cardiac remodeling in disease.<newchar>ECM stiffness<n-term>Rho/ROCK<n-term>TRPV4<n-term>cardiac fibroblast<n-term>differentiation<n-term>integrin<n-term>mechanical signaling<n-term>myofibroblast<n-term><newabs>23865428<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of tightly regulated, zinc-dependent proteases that degrade extracellular matrix (ECM), cell surface, and intracellular proteins. Vascular remodeling, whether as a function of normal physiology or as a consequence of a myriad of pathological processes, requires degradation of the ECM. Thus, the expression and activity of many MMPs are up-regulated in numerous conditions affecting the vasculature and often exacerbate vascular dysfunction. A growing body of evidence supports the rationale of using MMP inhibitors for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases, stroke, and chronic vascular dementia. This manuscript will examine promising targets for MMP inhibition in atherosclerosis and stroke, reviewing findings in preclinical animal models and human patient studies. Strategies for MMP inhibition have progressed beyond chelating the catalytic zinc to functional blocking antibodies and peptides that target either the active site or exosites of the enzyme. While the inhibition of MMP activity presents a rational therapeutic avenue, the multiplicity of roles for MMPs and the non-selective nature of MMP inhibitors that cause unintended side-effects hinder full realization of MMP inhibition as therapy for vascular disease. For optimal therapeutic effects to be realized, specific targets for MMP inhibition in these pathologies must first be identified and then attacked by potent and selective agents during the most appropriate timepoint.<newchar><newabs>14622946<newchar>Connective tissues differ from other tissues in their more abundant extracellular matrix (ECM). This matrix is composed of a relatively large number of macromolecules interacting with each other as well as with the cells they are surrounding. Such cells, fibroblasts, chondrocytes and others, secrete the macromolecules of ECM according to a genetically and environmentally regulated &quot;program&quot;. It appeared recently that one type of macromolecular interactions is characterized by the selective cleavage of some of the ECM components. Some of these proteolytic cleavage products were shown to possess remarkable biological activities absent from the parent molecules. Such mechanisms were shown to play an important role in aging processes. Also called matricryptins such peptides and their activities are produced from several matrix components. Of special interest are these matricryptins which are derived from fibronectin, laminin and elastin. Their production by proteolytic attack of the original ECM components, followed by their novel biological activities, form in some instances autoamplifying vicious circles. Such &quot;epigenetic&quot;, post-translational mechanisms are not coded in the genome, they are neither &quot;accidental&quot;, nor &quot;chaotic&quot; but remarkably predictable, the result of the presence in several ECM components of &quot;matricryptic&quot; sites and coregulated synthesis of matrix components carrying such sites and of proteolytic enzymes producing the matricryptins. Some examples will be discussed, derived from the experiments carried out in our laboratory and others over the years, involved in aging and in some of the age-dependent pathologies.<newchar><newabs>21047552<newchar>Myocardial remodeling denotes a chronic pathological condition of dysfunctional myocardium that occurs in cardiac hypertrophy (CH) and heart failure (HF). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are major initiators of excessive collagen and fibronectin deposition in cardiac fibrosis. Increased production of ROS and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) activation provide a strong link between oxidative stress and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in cardiac hypertrophy. The protective inhibitory actions of pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC), a pharmacological inhibitor of NF-κB and a potent antioxidant, make this a good agent to evaluate the role of inhibition of NF-κB and prevention of excessive ECM deposition in maladaptive cardiac remodeling during HF. In this report, we used a transgenic mouse model (Myo-Tg) that has cardiac-specific overexpression of myotrophin. This overexpression of myotrophin in the Myo-Tg model directs ECM deposition and increased NF-κB activity, which result in CH and ultimately HF. Using the Myo-Tg model, our data showed upregulation of profibrotic genes (including collagen types I and III, connective tissue growth factor, and fibronectin) in Myo-Tg mice, compared to wild-type mice, during the progression of CH. Pharmacological inhibition of NF-κB by PDTC in the Myo-Tg mice resulted in a significant reduction in cardiac mass, NF-κB activity, and profibrotic gene expression and improved cardiac function. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of ECM regulation by inhibition of NF-κB activation by PDTC. The study highlights the importance of the NF-κB signaling pathway and therapeutic benefits of PDTC treatment in cardiac remodeling.<newchar><newabs>24212952<newchar>Complex interactions between cancer cells and host stromal cells result in the formation of the &quot;tumor microenvironment&quot;, where inflammatory alterations involve the infiltration of tumor-associated fibroblasts and inflammatory leukocytes that contribute to the acquisition of malignant characteristics, such as increased cancer cell proliferation, invasiveness, metastasis, angiogenesis, and avoidance of adaptive immunity. The microenvironment of a solid tumor is comprised not only of cellular compartments, but also of bioactive substances, including cytokines, growth factors, and extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM can act as a scaffold for cell migration, a reservoir for cytokines and growth factors, and a signal through receptor binding. During inflammation, ECM components and their degraded fragments act directly and indirectly as inflammatory stimuli in certain cases and regulate the functions of inflammatory and immune cells. One such ECM component, hyaluronan, has recently been implicated to modulate innate immune cell function through pattern recognition toll-like receptors and accelerate the recruitment and activation of tumor-associated macrophages in inflamed cancers. Here, we will summarize the molecular mechanism linking inflammation with ECM remodeling in the tumor microenvironment, with a particular emphasis on the role of hyaluronan in controlling the inflammatory response.<newchar><newabs>25405160<newchar>A major function of platelets is keeping the vascular system intact. Platelet activation at sites of vascular injury leads to the formation of a hemostatic plug. Activation of platelets is therefore crucial for normal hemostasis; however, uncontrolled platelet activation may also lead to the formation of occlusive thrombi that can cause ischemic events. Although they are essential for proper hemostasis, platelet function extends to physiologic processes such as tissue repair, wound remodeling and antimicrobial host defense, or pathologic conditions such as thrombosis, atherosclerosis, chronic inflammatory diseases and cancer. Platelets can be activated by soluble molecules including thrombin, thromboxane A2 (TXA2), adenosine diphosphate (ADP), serotonin or by adhesive extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as von Willebrand factor (vWF) and collagen. Here we describe recent advances in the activation of platelets by non-canonical platelet agonists such as galectins. By acting either in soluble or immobilized form, these glycan-binding proteins trigger all platelet activation responses through modulation of discrete signaling pathways. We also offer new hypotheses and some speculations about the role of platelet-galectin interactions not only in hemostasis and thrombosis but also in inflammation and related diseases such as atherosclerosis and cancer.<newchar>Galectins<n-term>platelets<n-term>thrombosis<n-term><newabs>23179310<newchar>The Achilles tendon has a high incidence of rupture, and the healing process leads to a disorganized extracellular matrix (ECM) with a high rate of injury recurrence. To evaluate the effects of different conditions of low-level laser (LLL) application on partially tenotomized tendons, adult male rats were divided into the following groups: G1, intact; G2, injured; G3, injured + LLL therapy (LLLT; 4 J/cm(2) continuous); G4, injured + LLLT (4 J/cm(2), 20 Hz); G5, injured; G6, injured + LLLT (4 J/cm(2) continuous); and G7, injured + LLLT (4 J/cm(2), 20 Hz until the 7th day and 2 kHz from 8 to 14 days). G2, G3, and G4 were euthanized 8 days after injury, and G5, G6, and G7 were euthanized on the 15th day. The quantification of hydroxyproline (HOPro) and non-collagenous protein (NCP), zymography for matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9, and Western blotting (WB) for collagen types I and III were performed. HOPro levels showed a significant decrease in all groups (except G7) when compared with G1. The NCP level increased in all transected groups. WB for collagen type I showed an increase in G4 and G7. For collagen type III, G4 presented a higher value than G2. Zymography for MMP-2 indicated high values in G4 and G7. MMP-9 increased in both treatment groups euthanized at 8 days, especially in G4. Our results indicate that the pulsed LLLT improved the remodeling of the ECM during the healing process in tendons through activation of MMP-2 and stimulation of collagen synthesis.<newchar><newabs>11497292<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during normal and pathologic tissue remodeling and neoplastic cell invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been identified to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are thus, crucial in neoplastic cell progression, invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human breast carcinomas (BCs) employing an indirect, biotin-streptavidin based, alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D (negative)]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in BCs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A). High intensity immunoreactivity (A,B) but focal was detected employing a MoAB targeted against the MMP-9 enzyme. No presence of MMP-2 or -13 could be established in the BC cases observed by us. Based on these results we propose that MMP-3 and -10 are implicated in the pathogenesis of BC, while MMP-9 is possibly involved in neo-angiogenic events also closely associated with growth and expansion of the neoplastically transformed cell mass, as well as metastasis of individual, extremely aggressive, expressing dedifferentiated cellular immunophenotype (IP) cell clones selected during the microevolution of the BC.<newchar><newabs>24591669<newchar>Airway remodelling is a critical feature of chronic bronchial diseases, characterised by aberrant repair of the epithelium and accumulation of fibroblasts, which contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition resulting in fixed bronchial obstruction. Recently, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been identified as a new source of fibroblasts that could contribute to the remodelling of the airways. This phenomenon consists of the loss of the epithelial phenotype by bronchial epithelial cells and the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype. These cells are then able to migrate and secrete ECM molecules. Herein, we review the different types of EMT. We will then focus on the signalling pathways that are involved, such as transforming growth factor-β and Wnt, as well as the more recently described Sonic Hedgehog pathway. Finally, we will highlight the implication of EMT in airway remodelling in specific chronic bronchial pathologies, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchiolitis obliterans following lung transplantation. Despite the limitations of in vitro models, future studies of EMT in vivo are warranted to shed new light on the pathomechanisms of bronchial obstruction.<newchar><newabs>24012661<newchar>The mutual and interdependent interaction between tumor and its microenvironment is a crucial topic in cancer research. Recently, it was reported that targeting stromal events could improve efficacies of current therapeutics and prevent metastatic spreading. Tumor microenvironment is a &quot;complex network&quot; of different cell types, soluble factors, signaling molecules and extracellular matrix components, which orchestrate the fate of tumor progression. As by definition, cancer stem cells (CSCs) are proposed to be the unique cell type able to maintain tumor mass and survive outside the primary tumor at metastatic sites. Being exposed to environmental stressors, including reactive oxygen species (ROS), CSCs have developed a GSH-dependent antioxidant system to improve ROS defense capability and acquire a malignant phenotype. Nevertheless, tumor progression is dependent on extracellular matrix remodeling, fibroblasts and macrophages activation in response to oxidative stress, as well as epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducing signals and endothelial and perivascular cells recruitment. Besides providing a survival advantage by inducing de novo angiogenesis, tumor-associated vessels contribute to successful dissemination by facilitating tumor cells entry into the circulatory system and driving the formation of pre-metastatic niche. In this review, we focus on the synergistic effect of hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) and vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) in the successful outgrowth of metastasis, integrating therefore many of the emerging models and theories in the field.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>CAFs<n-term>CAMs<n-term>CRC<n-term>CSCs<n-term>ECM<n-term>EMT<n-term>GSH<n-term>HIF<n-term>Hypoxia<n-term>MMPs<n-term>ROS<n-term>Tumor microenvironment<n-term>VEGF<n-term>cancer stem cells<n-term>cancer-associated fibroblasts<n-term>cancer-associated macrophages<n-term>colorectal cancer<n-term>epithelial mesenchymal transition<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hypoxia-inducible factor<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>reactive oxygen species<n-term>reduced glutathione<n-term>vascular endothelial growth factor<n-term><newabs>25169886<newchar>The integrin family of cell adhesion receptors plays a major role in mediating interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix. Normal adult articular chondrocytes express α1β1, α3β1, α5β1, α10β1, αVβ1, αVβ3, and αVβ5 integrins, while chondrocytes from osteoarthritic tissue also express α2β1, α4β1, α6β1. These integrins bind a host of cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, most notably fibronectin and collagen types II and VI, which provide signals that regulate cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, and matrix remodeling. By initiating signals in response to mechanical forces, chondrocyte integrins also serve as mechanotransducers. When the cartilage matrix is damaged in osteoarthritis, fragments of fibronectin are generated that signal through the α5β1 integrin to activate a pro-inflammatory and pro-catabolic response which, if left unchecked, could contribute to progressive matrix degradation. The cell signaling pathways activated in response to excessive mechanical signals and to fibronectin fragments are being unraveled and may represent useful therapeutic targets for slowing or stopping progressive matrix destruction in arthritis.<newchar>Cartilage<n-term>Cell signaling<n-term>Chondrocyte<n-term>Integrin<n-term>Osteoarthritis<n-term><newabs>24186934<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9, one of the most widely investigated MMPs, regulates pathological remodeling processes that involve inflammation and fibrosis in cardiovascular disease. MMP-9 directly degrades extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and activates cytokines and chemokines to regulate tissue remodeling. MMP-9 deletion or inhibition has proven overall beneficial in multiple animal models of cardiovascular disease. As such, MMP-9 expression and activity is a common end point measured. MMP-9 cell-specific overexpression, however, has also proven beneficial and highlights the fact that little information is available on the underlying mechanisms of MMP-9 function. In this review, we summarize our current understanding of MMP-9 physiology, including structure, regulation, activation, and downstream effects of increased MMP-9. We discuss MMP-9 roles during inflammation and fibrosis in cardiovascular disease. By concentrating on the substrates of MMP-9 and their roles in cardiovascular disease, we explore the overall function and discuss future directions on the translational potential of MMP-9 based therapies.<newchar><newabs>11572876<newchar>Homeostasis of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of tissues is regulated by controlling deposition and degradation of ECM proteins. The breakdown of ECM is essential in blastocyst implantation and embryonic development, tissue morphogenesis, menstrual shedding, bone formation, tissue resorption after delivery, and tumor growth and invasion. TGF-beta family members are one of the classes of proteins that actively participate in the homeostasis of ECM. Here, we report on the effect of lefty, a novel member of the TGF-beta family, on the homeostasis of extracellular matrix in a fibrosarcoma model. Fibroblastic cells forced to express lefty by retroviral transduction lost their ability to deposit collagen in vivo. This event was associated with down-regulation of the steady-state level of connective tissue growth factor that induces collagen type I mRNA. In addition, lefty transduction significantly decreased collagen type I mRNA expression and simultaneously increased collagenolytic, gelatinolytic, elastolytic, and caseinolytic activities in vivo by the transduced fibroblasts. These findings provide a new insight on the actions of lefty and suggest that this cytokine plays an active role in remodeling of the extracellular matrix in vivo.<newchar><newabs>23684763<newchar>Biohybrid materials combining synthetic polymers with biological components are highly suited for tissue engineering in order to emulate the behavior of natural materials such as the extracellular matrix (ECM). In order to allow for an optimal cell-material interplay, the physical and biological parameters of the artificial matrix need to be dynamically remodeled during cultivation. Current tissue engineering concepts are mainly based on passive remodeling mechanisms including the degradation of the hydrogel and the release of incorporated biomolecules and therefore do not enable external adjustment of cultivation conditions. We present a novel hydrogel material that is able to serve as a cell growth matrix, whose degradation and presentation of cell-interacting biomolecules can be externally controlled by the addition of a pharmacological substance. The hydrogel is based on branched polyethylene glycol that is covalently decorated with the aminocoumarin-antibiotic switchable gyrase B protein conferring stimulus-responsive degradation. ECM properties were conferred to the hydrogels with cell attachment motifs and a general approach for the incorporation and inducible release of therapeutic biomolecules. This smart biohybrid material has the potential to serve as a next-generation tissue engineering device which allows for dynamic external adjustment of the physical and biological parameters, resulting in optimally controlled tissue formation.<newchar>Cell adhesion<n-term>Drug delivery<n-term>Fibroblast growth factor<n-term>Hydrogel<n-term>Stimulus-responsive<n-term><newabs>24260605<newchar>Acne, a chronic inflammatory skin disease, can be seen at any age but it most often occurs in adolescents and young people. Several factors, including increased sebum production, abnormal cornification of the pilosebaceous units, proliferation of Propionibacterium acne, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, are thought to be associated with the pathogenesis of the acne. The remodeling of the ECM is regulated by a balance between matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors called tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). The current study investigated the potential association between MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) and TIMP-2 (-418 G/C) polymorphisms and the risk for acne in a Turkish population. The study was conducted with 85 subjects who presented to the Dermatology Department of Duzce University Hospital. DNA was isolated from 2 ml of peripheral blood taken from each subject, and their genotypes were analyzed with the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. The CC, CT, and TT genotypes for MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) polymorphism were similar between the patient and control group (24 [55.8%], 17 [39.5%], and 2 [4.7%], respectively, vs. 21 [50%], 18 [42.9%], and 3 [7.1%], respectively). However, the distribution of the GG, GC, and CC genotypes for TIMP-2 (-418 G/C) polymorphism were different between the patient and control group (30 [69.8%], 9 [14.8%] and 4 [9.3%], respectively, vs. 26 [61.9%], 14 [33.3%], and 2 [4.8%], respectively). The results demonstrated that the TIMP-2 (-418 CC) genotype was nearly two times more common in the patient group compared to the control group (p=0.686, OR=1.45). It may be possible that the TIMP-2 (-418 CC) genotype increases the tendency to develop acne vulgaris by disrupting the balance between MMPs and TIMPs. Further investigations are needed to clarify more precisely the relationship between acne and MMP-TIMP genes.<newchar>Acne vulgaris<n-term>MMPs<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>polymorphism<n-term><newabs>24099797<newchar>Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is less common in premenopausal women than men of the same age or postmenopausal women, suggesting vascular benefits of estrogen. Estrogen activates estrogen receptors ERα, ERβ and GPR30 in endothelium and vascular smooth muscle (VSM), which trigger downstream signaling pathways and lead to genomic and non-genomic vascular effects such as vasodilation, decreased VSM contraction and growth and reduced vascular remodeling. However, randomized clinical trials (RCTs), such as the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) and Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS), have shown little vascular benefits and even adverse events with menopausal hormone therapy (MHT), likely due to factors related to the MHT used, ER profile, and RCT design. Some MHT forms, dose, combinations or route of administration may have inadequate vascular effects. Age-related changes in ER amount, distribution, integrity and post-ER signaling could alter the vascular response to MHT. The subject's age, preexisting CVD, and hormone environment could also reduce the effects of MHT. Further evaluation of natural and synthetic estrogens, phytoestrogens, and selective estrogen-receptor modulators (SERMs), and the design of appropriate MHT combinations, dose, route and 'timing' could improve the effectiveness of conventional MHT and provide alternative therapies in the peri-menopausal period. Targeting ER using specific ER agonists, localized MHT delivery, and activation of specific post-ER signaling pathways could counter age-related changes in ER. Examination of the hormone environment and conditions associated with hormone imbalance such as polycystic ovary syndrome may reveal the causes of abnormal hormone-receptor interactions. Consideration of these factors in new RCTs such as the Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study (KEEPS) could enhance the vascular benefits of estrogen in postmenopausal CVD.<newchar>17β-estradiol<n-term>27-hydroxycholesterol<n-term>27HC<n-term>Akt<n-term>AngII<n-term>C-reactive protein<n-term>CEE<n-term>CRP<n-term>CVD<n-term>E2<n-term>EC<n-term>ECM<n-term>ELITE<n-term>ER<n-term>Early versus Late Intervention Trial with Estradiol<n-term>Endothelium<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>FMD<n-term>G protein-coupled receptor 30<n-term>GPR30<n-term>HERS<n-term>HSP90<n-term>Hypertension<n-term>IL-6<n-term>KEEPS<n-term>Kronos early estrogen prevention study<n-term>MAPK<n-term>MHT<n-term>MI<n-term>MMP<n-term>MPA<n-term>NHS<n-term>NO<n-term>Nurses’ Health Study<n-term>OVX<n-term>P4<n-term>PCOS<n-term>PI(3)K<n-term>Post-MW<n-term>Pre-MW<n-term>Progesterone<n-term>RCT<n-term>SHR<n-term>Sex hormones<n-term>T<n-term>TMF-α<n-term>TXA2<n-term>Testosterone<n-term>VSM<n-term>VSM cell<n-term>VSMC<n-term>VTE<n-term>Vascular smooth muscle<n-term>WHI<n-term>Women's Health Initiative<n-term>angiotensin II<n-term>cardiovascular disease<n-term>conjugated equine estrogen<n-term>eNOS<n-term>endothelial cell<n-term>endothelial nitric oxide synthase<n-term>estrogen receptor<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>flow mediated dilation<n-term>heart and estrogen/progestin replacement study<n-term>heat shock protein-90<n-term>interleukin-6<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>medroxyprogesterone acetate<n-term>menopausal hormone therapy<n-term>mitogen-activated protein kinase<n-term>myocardial infarction<n-term>nitric oxide<n-term>ovariectomized<n-term>phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase<n-term>polycystic ovary syndrome<n-term>postmenopausal women<n-term>premenopausal women<n-term>progesterone<n-term>protein kinase B<n-term>randomized clinical trial<n-term>spontaneously hypertensive rat<n-term>testosterone<n-term>thromboxane A2<n-term>tumor necrosis factor-α<n-term>vascular smooth muscle<n-term>venous thrombo-embolism<n-term><newabs>23170122<newchar>ALZET(®) osmotic pumps are implantable devices used in animals for the continuous infusion of drugs or proteins at controlled rates from 1 day to 4 weeks. Pumps have been used successfully in a number of studies on the effects of controlled delivery of a wide range of experimental agents, independent of their properties. In the present study, use of these pumps was made in mice with diabetic nephropathy. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) mediates diabetic nephropathy, which is characterized by the excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the kidney. Disproportionate PAI-1 inactivates tissue plasminogen activator, which is one of the proteolytic enzymes in a cascade responsible for ECM remodeling in the kidney. The decrease of PAI-1 in the kidney has been shown to arrest the progression of nephropathy in experimental animals. This was achieved using inactive PAI-1R which increased the clearance of wild-type PAI-1 in order to protect net proteolytic activity and ECM clearance. However, this protein has a brief half-life in vivo, therefore, high and frequent doses are required. Thus, VLHL NS PAI-1 protein with a long half-life of over 700 h (Gln197Cys, Gly355Cys) inactivated by single point mutation (Arg369Ala) was used. Following the sacrifice of animals the tips of the flow moderators of the osmotic pumps in the treated animals were found to be clogged. In addition, from each pump from the treatment group, but not controls, we collected 50-150 μl of clear liquid containing VLHL NS PAI-1, cellular and serum proteins suggesting early pump sealing by cellular material. In conclusion, despite encouraging results obtained for the PAI-1R protein, the method of VLHL PAI-1 delivery should be ameliorated.<newchar><newabs>21267944<newchar>The communication of bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts is a fundamental requirement for balanced bone remodelling. For biomaterial research, development of in vitro models is necessary to investigate this communication. In the present study human bone marrow stromal cells and human monocytes were cultivated in order to differentiate into osteoblasts and osteoclasts, respectively. Finally, a cultivation regime was identified which firstly induces the differentiation of the human bone marrow stromal cells followed by the induction of osteoclastogenesis through the osteoblasts formed--without the external addition of the factors RANKL and M-CSF. As a feedback on osteoblasts enhanced gene expression of BSP II was detected for modifications which facilitated the formation of large multinuclear osteoclasts. Phenotype characterization was performed by biochemical methods (DNA, LDH, ALP, TRAP 5b), gene expression analysis (ALP, BSP II, RANKL, IL-6, VTNR, CTSK, TRAP, OSCAR, CALCR) as well as light microscopy, confocal laser scanning microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy. After establishing this model on polystyrene, similar positive results were obtained for cultivation on a relevant bone substitution material--a composite xerogel of silica, collagen, and calcium phosphate.<newchar><newabs>21749862<newchar>In fetal valve maturation the mechanisms by which the relatively homogeneous proteoglycan-rich extracellular matrix (ECM) of endocardial cushions is replaced by a specialized and stratified ECM found in mature valves are not understood. Therefore, we reasoned that uncovering proteases critical for 'remodeling' the proteoglycan rich (extracellular matrix) ECM may elucidate novel mechanisms of valve development. We have determined that mice deficient in ADAMTS5, (A Disintegrin-like And Metalloprotease domain with ThromboSpondin-type 1 motifs) which we demonstrated is expressed predominantly by valvular endocardium during cardiac valve maturation, exhibited enlarged valves. ADAMTS5 deficient valves displayed a reduction in cleavage of its substrate versican, a critical cardiac proteoglycan. In vivo reduction of versican, in Adamts5(-/-) mice, achieved through Vcan heterozygosity, substantially rescued the valve anomalies. An increase in BMP2 immunolocalization, Sox9 expression and mesenchymal cell proliferation were observed in Adamts5(-/-) valve mesenchyme and correlated with expansion of the spongiosa (proteoglycan-rich) region in Adamts5(-/-) valve cusps. Furthermore, these data suggest that ECM remodeling via ADAMTS5 is required for endocardial to mesenchymal signaling in late fetal valve development. Although adult Adamts5(-/-) mice are viable they do not recover from developmental valve anomalies and have myxomatous cardiac valves with 100% penetrance. Since the accumulation of proteoglycans is a hallmark of myxomatous valve disease, based on these data we hypothesize that a lack of versican cleavage during fetal valve development may be a potential etiology of adult myxomatous valve disease.<newchar><newabs>23648172<newchar>Extracellular matrix remodeling is a continuous process that is critical to maintaining tissue homeostasis, and alterations in this process have been implicated in chronic diseases such as atherosclerosis, lung fibrosis, and emphysema. Collagen and elastin are subject to ascorbate-dependent hydroxylation. While this post-translational modification in collagen is critical for function, the role of hydroxylation of elastin is not well understood. A number of studies have indicated that ascorbate leads to reduced elastin synthesis. However, these studies were limited to analysis of cells grown under traditional 2D tissue culture conditions. To investigate this process we evaluated elastin and collagen synthesis in primary rat neonatal pulmonary fibroblasts in response to ascorbate treatment in traditional 2D culture and within 3D cross-linked gelatin matrices (Gelfoam). We observed little change in elastin or collagen biosynthesis in standard 2D cultures treated with ascorbate, yet observed a dramatic increase in elastin protein and mRNA levels in response to ascorbate in 3D cell-Gelfoam constructs. These data suggest that the cell-ECM architecture dictates pulmonary cell response to ascorbate, and that approaches aimed toward stimulating ECM repair or engineering functional cell-derived matrices should consider all aspects of the cellular environment.<newchar><newabs>23856618<newchar>Dilated chronic cardiomyopathy (DCC) from Chagas disease is associated with myocardial remodeling and interstitial fibrosis, resulting in extracellular matrix (ECM) changes. In this study, we characterized for the first time the serum matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9 levels, as well as their main cell sources in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients presenting with the indeterminate (IND) or cardiac (CARD) clinical form of Chagas disease. Our results showed that serum levels of MMP-9 are associated with the severity of Chagas disease. The analysis of MMP production by T lymphocytes showed that CD8(+) T cells are the main mononuclear leukocyte source of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 molecules. Using a new 3-dimensional model of fibrosis, we observed that sera from patients with Chagas disease induced an increase in the extracellular matrix components in cardiac spheroids. Furthermore, MMP-2 and MMP-9 showed different correlations with matrix proteins and inflammatory cytokines in patients with Chagas disease. Our results suggest that MMP-2 and MMP-9 show distinct activities in Chagas disease pathogenesis. While MMP-9 seems to be involved in the inflammation and cardiac remodeling of Chagas disease, MMP-2 does not correlate with inflammatory molecules.<newchar><newabs>25123184<newchar>Epigalloccatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the main polyphenol component of green tea (leaves of Camellia sinensis). EGCG is known for its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, and anti-carcinogenic properties. Here, we identify EGCG as a new inhibitor of ocular angiogenesis and its vascular permeability. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) play a key role in the processes of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and microvascular permeability during angiogenesis. We investigated the inhibitory effects of EGCG on ocular neovascularization and vascular permeability using the retina oriented cells and animal models induced by VEGF and alkaline burn. EGCG treatment significantly decreased mRNA and protein expression levels of MMP-9 in the presence of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in human retinal pigment epithelial cells (HRPECs). EGCG also effectively protected ARPE-19 cells from cell death and attenuated mRNA expressions of key angiogenic factors (MMP-9, VEGF, VEGF Receptor-2) by inhibiting generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). EGCG significantly inhibited proliferation, vascular permeability, and tube formation in VEGF-induced human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (HRMECs). Furthermore, EGCG significantly reduced vascular leakage and permeability by blood-retinal barrier breakdown in VEGF-induced animal models. In addition, EGCG effectively limited upregulation of MMP-9 and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM/CD31) on corneal neovascularization (CNV) induced by alkaline burn. Our data suggest that MMP-9 and VEGF are key therapeutic targets of EGCG for treatment and prevention of ocular angiogenic diseases such as age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy, and corneal neovascularization.<newchar><newabs>23819988<newchar>Cellular interactions with extracellular matrices (ECM) through the application of mechanical forces mediate numerous biological processes including developmental morphogenesis, wound healing and cancer metastasis. They also play a key role in the cellular repopulation and/or remodeling of engineered tissues and organs. While 2-D studies can provide important insights into many aspects of cellular mechanobiology, cells reside within 3-D ECMs in vivo, and matrix structure and dimensionality have been shown to impact cell morphology, protein organization and mechanical behavior. Global measurements of cell-induced compaction of 3-D collagen matrices can provide important insights into the regulation of overall cell contractility by various cytokines and signaling pathways. However, to understand how the mechanics of cell spreading, migration, contraction and matrix remodeling are regulated at the molecular level, these processes must also be studied in individual cells. Here we review the evolution and application of techniques for imaging and assessing local cell-matrix mechanical interactions in 3-D culture models, tissue explants and living animals.<newchar>Cell mechanics<n-term>Cell migration<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Microscopy<n-term><newabs>23792687<newchar>Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), an inflammatory atopic disease of the esophagus, causes massive eosinophil infiltration, basal cell hyperplasia, and sub-epithelial fibrosis. To elucidate cellular and molecular factors involved in esophageal tissue damage and remodeling, we examined pinch biopsies from EoE and normal pediatric patients. An inflammation gene array confirmed that eotaxin-3, its receptor CCR3 and interleukins IL-13 and IL-5 were upregulated. An extracellular matrix (ECM) gene array revealed upregulation of CD44 &amp; CD54, and of ECM proteases (ADAMTS1 &amp; MMP14). A cytokine antibody array showed a marked decrease in IL-1α and IL-1 receptor antagonist and an increase in eotaxin-2 and epidermal growth factor. Western analysis indicated reduced expression of intercellular junction proteins, E-cadherin and claudin-1 and increased expression of occludin and vimentin. We have identified a number of novel genes and proteins whose expression is altered in EoE. These findings provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the disease.<newchar>Claudin-1<n-term>Cytokines<n-term>E-cadherin<n-term>Inflammation<n-term>Occludin<n-term>Vimentin<n-term><newabs>21954177<newchar>The non-destructive and label-free monitoring of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and degradation processes is a great challenge. Raman spectroscopy is a non-contact method that offers the possibility to analyze ECM in situ without the need for tissue processing. Here, we employed Raman spectroscopy for the detection of heart valve ECM, focusing on collagen fibers. We screened the leaflets of porcine aortic valves either directly after dissection or after treatment with collagenase. By comparing the fingerprint region of the Raman spectra of control and treated tissues (400-1800 cm(-1)), we detected no significant differences based on Raman shifts; however, we found that increasing collagen degradation translated into decreasing Raman signal intensities. After these proof-of-principal experiments, we compared Raman spectra of native and cryopreserved valve tissues and revealed that the signal intensities of the frozen samples were significantly lower compared to those of native tissues, similar to the data seen in the enzymatically-degraded tissues. In conclusion, our data demonstrate that Raman microscopy is a promising, non-destructive and non-contact tool to probe ECM state in situ.<newchar><newabs>22872786<newchar>Fibrosis is a hallmark histologic event of chronic liver diseases and is characterized by the excessive accumulation and reorganization of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The gold standard for assessment of fibrosis is liver biopsy. As this procedure has various limitations, including risk of patient injury and sampling error, a non-invasive serum marker for liver fibrosis is desirable. The increasing understanding of the pathogenesis of hepatic fibrosis has suggested several markers which could be useful indicators of hepatic fibrogenesis and fibrosis. These markers include serum markers of liver function, ECM synthesis, fibrolytic processes, ECM degradation and fibrogenesis related cytokines. Recently, neo-epitopes, which are post-translational modifications of proteins, have been successfully used in bone and cartilage diseases which are characterized by extensive ECM remodeling. Increasing numbers of studies are being undertaken to identify neo-epitopes generated during liver fibrosis, and which ultimately might be useful for diagnosing and monitoring fibrogenesis. To date, the metalloproteinases generated fragment of collagen I, III, IV and VI have been proven to be elevated in two rat models of fibrosis. This review summarizes the recent efforts that have been made to identify potentially reliable non-invasive serum markers. We used the recently proposed BIPED (Burden of disease, Investigative, Prognostic, Efficacy and Diagnostic) system to characterize potential serum markers and neo-epitope markers that have been identified to date.<newchar>extracellular matrix<n-term>liver fibrosis<n-term>neo-epitope<n-term>serum marker<n-term><newabs>21471197<newchar>During implantation, the uterine stromal cells undergo terminal differentiation into decidual cells, which support the proper progression of maternal-embryo interactions to successful establishment of pregnancy. The decidual cells synthesize extracellular matrix (ECM) components, such as laminins and collagens, which assemble into a unique basal lamina-like network that surrounds these cells. The functional significance of this matrix during implantation is unknown. We previously showed that the transcription factor CCAAT enhancer-binding protein β (C/EBPβ) critically regulates decidualization in the mouse. We now provide evidence that C/EBPβ directly controls the Lamc1 gene, which encodes a predominant laminin constituent of the ECM produced by the decidual cells. Suppression of Lamc1 expression in mouse primary endometrial stromal cells prevented the assembly of this ECM and impaired stromal differentiation. Attenuation of expression of integrin β1, a major constituent of the integrin receptors targeted by decidual laminins, also inhibited this differentiation process. Disruption of laminin-integrin interactions led to impaired activation of the focal adhesion kinase, an integrin-mediated regulator of cytoskeletal remodeling during decidualization. To further analyze the role of the decidual ECM in modulating maternal-embryo interactions, we monitored trophoblast invasion into differentiating uterine stromal monolayers, using a co-culture system. Silencing of stromal Lamc1 expression, which prevented formation of the basal lamina-like matrix, resulted in marked reduction in trophoblast outgrowth. Collectively, our findings identified C/EBPβ as a critical regulator of the unique ECM that controls decidual cell architecture and differentiation, and it provided new insights into the mechanisms by which the uterine stromal microenvironment controls the progression of embryo implantation.<newchar><newabs>21339741<newchar>Dynamic interactions between cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) through integrins influence most cellular functions. Normal cells, but even more, tumor cells are subjected to different forms of stress, including ischemia, radical oxygen species production, starvation, mechanical stress or genotoxic insults due to anti-cancer drugs or irradiation. In these situations, an adaptative cellular response occurs, integrating a complex network of intracellular signaling modules, which, depending on stress intensity, may result to either damage repair followed by complete restitution of cellular functions, or programmed cell death. Because of its implication in oncogenesis and anti-cancer therapy, cellular stress response has been thoroughly investigated. However, most of these studies have been performed in the context of isolated cells without taking into consideration that most cells are part of the tissue within which they interact with ECM through integrin. Few studies have described the influence of stress on cell-to-ECM interaction. However, one can speculate that, in these conditions, cells could functionally interact with protein microenvironment either to create positive interactions to survive (for example by facilitating protective pathways) or negative interaction to die (for example by facilitating detachment). In this review, we summarize the knowledge relative to the influence of different stress modalities on ECM remodeling, integrin expression and/or function modifications, and possible functional consequences, independently from the cellular model as these findings came from a large variety of cells (mesenchymal, endothelial, muscular, epithelial and glandular) and fields of application (cancer, vascular biology and tissue engineering). Most studies support the general notion that non-lethal stress favors ECM stiffness, integrin activation and enhanced survival. This field opens large perspectives not only in tumor biology but also in anti-cancer therapy by targeting one or several steps of the integrin-mediated signaling pathway, including integrin ligation, or activation of integrin-linked enzymes or integrin adaptors.<newchar><newabs>24402648<newchar>Biologic scaffold materials composed of mammalian extracellular matrix (ECM) are prepared by decellularization of source tissues harvested from either humans (allogeneic) or a variety of other (xenogeneic) species. These matrix scaffold materials are commonly regulated and used as surgical mesh materials for applications such as ventral hernia repair, musculotendinous tissue reconstruction, dura mater replacement, reconstructive breast surgery, pelvic floor reconstruction, and the treatment of cutaneous ulcers, among others. The clinical results for these applications vary widely for reasons which include characteristics of the source tissue, methods and efficacy of tissue decellularization, and methods of processing/manufacturing. However, the primary determinant of success or failure in the clinical setting is the response of the host to these implanted biologic scaffold materials. It is logical to question why any non-self biologic material, particularly a xenogeneic material, would not elicit an early and aggressive adverse immune response. The present manuscript briefly describes the known mechanisms by which these biologic scaffold materials can facilitate a constructive remodeling response, the known causative factors of an adverse response, and provides a general discussion of the role of the macrophage in determining outcome.<newchar><newabs>23916785<newchar>The Abl2/Arg nonreceptor tyrosine kinase is enriched in dendritic spines where it is essential for maintaining dendrite and synapse stability in the postnatal mouse brain. Arg is activated downstream of integrin α3β1 receptors and it regulates the neuronal actin cytoskeleton by directly binding F-actin and via phosphorylation of substrates including p190RhoGAP and cortactin. Neurons in mice lacking Arg or integrin α3β1 develop normally through postnatal day 21 (P21), however by P42 mice exhibit major reductions in dendrite arbor size and complexity, and lose dendritic spines and synapses. As a result, mice with loss of Arg and Arg-dependent signaling pathways have impairments in memory tasks, heightened sensitivity to cocaine, and vulnerability to corticosteroid-induced neuronal remodeling. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms of Arg regulation may lead to therapeutic approaches to treat human psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases in which neuronal structure is destabilized.<newchar>Abl-related gene<n-term>Actin cytoskeleton<n-term>Arg<n-term>Ca(2+)-dependent phospholipid binding domain<n-term>CaLB<n-term>Cocaine<n-term>Corticosteroid<n-term>ECM<n-term>F-actin<n-term>Integrin α3β1<n-term>N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor<n-term>N-terminal acidic domain<n-term>NMDA<n-term>NTA<n-term>Neuronal stability<n-term>P21, P42<n-term>PH<n-term>SH2, SH3<n-term>Src homology domain 1,2<n-term>arg knockdown<n-term>argKD<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>filamentous actin<n-term>mEPSC<n-term>miniature evoked postsynaptic current<n-term>p120<n-term>p120RasGAP, 120kDa GTPase activating protein for Ras<n-term>p190<n-term>p190RhoGAP, 190kDa GTPase activating protein for Rho<n-term>pleckstrin homology domain<n-term>postnatal day 21, 42<n-term><newabs>23251159<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is known to provide various physicochemical cues in directing cell behavior including composition, topography, and dimensionality. Physical remodeling of the ECM has been documented in a variety of cancers. In breast cancer, the increased deposition of matrix proteins, their crosslinking, and alignment create a stiffer microenvironment that activates cell contractility and promotes cancer invasion. In this paper, we sought to study the collective influence of ECM composition and density on the contractile mechanics of human MDA-MB-231 cells making use of the recently established trypsin deadhesion assay. Using collagen and fibronectin-coated surfaces of varying density, we show that cell contractility is tuned in a density-dependent manner, with faster deadhesion on fibronectin-coated surfaces compared to collagen-coated surfaces under identical coating densities. The deadhesion responses are significantly delayed when cells are treated with the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin. By combining collagen and fibronectin at two different densities, we show that mixed ligand surfaces synergistically modulate cell contractility. Finally, we show that on fibroblast-derived 3D matrices that closely mimic in vivo matrices, cells are strongly polarized and exhibit faster deadhesion compared to the mixed ligand surfaces. Together, our results demonstrate that ECM composition, density, and 3D organization collectively regulate cell contractility.<newchar><newabs>19276645<newchar>Ceramides are used in skin care and treatment of dermatological diseases. Cell viability and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling are important parameters in skin health. Skin photoaging, from exposure to ultraviolet radiation, is associated with epidermal hyperplasia and dermal ECM atrophy caused by alterations in expression of matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs), elastin and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of c2-ceramide (ceramide) on the cell viability and expression of TGF-beta, MMP-1 and elastin in cultured keratinocytes and fibroblasts. Ceramide inhibited keratinocyte cell viability by apoptosis and stimulated expression of elastin, MMP-1 and TGF-beta, suggesting improved epidermal functioning by a TGF-beta mechanism. Conversely, ceramide stimulated fibroblast cell growth at the lower concentrations and inhibited the expression of MMP-1, elastin and TGF-beta, which indicates a predominantly beneficial effect in the prevention of photoaging-associated dermal alterationby TGF-beta and non-TGF-beta mechanisms. The regulation of MMP-1 expression by ceramide was transcriptionally mediated and via the activator protein-1 sequence in both keratinocytes and fibroblasts. The study delineates the specific, though differential, beneficial effects of ceramide in the prevention of epidermal hyperplasia and dermal ECM remodeling, associated with photoaging.<newchar><newabs>11348785<newchar>Relaxin participates in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in many reproductive organs, including the ovary, by regulating proteolytic enzyme activity. Accumulated evidence indicates this action of relaxin is involved in ovarian follicle development and ovulation. Equine follicles are embedded in cortex that is at the center of the ovary and they must expand/emigrate to the fossa, the only site in the ovary for ovulation. Due to the tremendous expansion of the follicle in this species, we hypothesized that ovarian stromal remodeling would be extensive. Therefore, cultured equine ovarian stromal cell (EOSC) lines were obtained from stroma at the apex of large follicles and the effects of relaxin on gelatinases A and B, tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs), plasminogen activators (PAs) and PA inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) activities were assessed. Our results showed that equine relaxin increased the activity of total gelatinase A (both pro forms and mature forms) and latent progelatinase B present in conditioned medium, latent progelatinase A present in cell extracts, and TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 present in conditioned medium. This study also revealed that equine relaxin increased the urokinase-type PA activity in conditioned medium and cell extracts, tissue-type PA activity in ECM and PAI-1 activity in conditioned medium. These results suggest that relaxin may contribute to equine follicle growth and migration, and facilitate ovulation by modulating the degradation of ECM in ovarian stromal tissue.<newchar><newabs>24768193<newchar>In this study, the chondrocyte-derived extracellular matrix (CECM) was evaluated for its activity to inhibit vessel invasion in vitro and in vivo. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and rabbit chondrocytes were plated on a bio-membrane made of CECM or human amniotic membrane (HAM). The adhesion, proliferation, and tube formation activity of HUVECs and chondrocytes were examined. The CECM and HAM powders were then mixed individually in Matrigel and injected subcutaneously into nude mice to examine vessel invasion in vivo after 1 week. Finally, a rabbit model of corneal neovascularization (NV) was induced by 3-point sutures in the upper cornea, and CECM and HAM membranes were implanted onto the corneal surface at day 5 after suture injury. The rabbits were sacrificed at 7 days after transplantation and the histopathological analysis was performed. The adhesion and proliferation of HUVECs were more efficient on the HAM than on the CECM membrane. However, chondrocytes on each membrane showed an opposite result being more efficient on the CECM membrane. The vessel invasion in vivo also occurred more deeply and intensively in Matrigel containing HAM than in the one containing CECM. In the rabbit NV model, CECM efficiently inhibited the neovessels formation and histological remodeling in the injured cornea. In summary, our findings suggest that CECM, an integral cartilage ECM composite, shows an inhibitory effect on vessel invasion both in vitro and in vivo, and could be a useful tool in a variety of biological and therapeutic applications including the prevention of neovascularization after cornea injury.<newchar>Anti-angiogenesis<n-term>Biomaterial<n-term>Chondrocyte-derived extracellular matrix<n-term>Corneal neovascularization<n-term>Vessel invasion<n-term><newabs>18673156<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a major role in extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover under both physiological and pathological conditions. Studies on venous tissues from experimental animals and humans identified several MMP subtypes, and showed significant changes in the expression and activity of specific MMPs during vein wall remodeling. Also, significant research has focused on the role of MMPs in chronic venous disease (CVD) and varicose vein formation in the lower extremities and their progression to thrombophlebitis and venous leg ulcer. Several hypotheses have been forwarded regarding the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the relation between MMPs and the formation, progression and complications of varicose veins. The effects of MMPs on ECM degradation could result in significant venous tissue remodeling and degenerative and structural changes in the vein wall, leading to venous dilation and valve dysfunction. MMPs may also induce early changes in the endothelium and venous smooth muscle function in the absence of significant ECM degradation or structural changes in the vein wall. In addition, evidence suggests increased activity of MMPs in the advanced stages of chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) associated with skin changes and leg ulceration as well as in the wound fluid environment. Several pharmacological therapies and surgical strategies are being utilized in the management of varicose veins, with variable success and recurrence rates. Inhibition of MMPs may represent a novel therapeutic intervention to limit the progression of varicose veins to CVI and leg ulceration.<newchar><newabs>16893566<newchar>Tissue turnover during wound healing, regeneration or integration of biomedical materials depends on the rate and extent of materials trafficking into and out of cells involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. To exploit these processes, we report the first model for matrix trafficking in which these issues are quantitatively assessed for cells grown on both native collagen (normal tissue) and denatured collagen (wound state) substrates. Human fibroblasts more rapidly remodeled denatured versus normal collagen type I to form new ECM. Fluxes to and from the cells from the collagen substrates and the formation of new ECM were quantified using radioactively labeled substrates. The model can be employed for the systematic and quantitative study of the impact of a broad range of physiological factors and disease states on tissue remodeling, integrating extracellular matrix structures and cell biology.<newchar><newabs>16735642<newchar>Cardiac remodeling in response to pressure overload involves reorganization of the myocytes and extracellular matrix (ECM). Neurohormonal pathways have been described as effector pathways in left ventricular ECM reorganization in response to pressure overload; we now are assessing the role of the T lymphocyte in this process. Mice with defined differences in T-lymphocyte function (C57BL/6 SCID, C57BL/6 WT, and BALB/c) were treated with 50 mg/L of N(G)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester in their drinking water for 30 days. The immune function of C57BL/6 WT mice was T-helper type 1 (TH1), BALB/c was TH2, and C57BL/6 SCID was null. The arterial blood pressure increased by 30% in all of the strains of mice. However, ventricular stiffness significantly decreased in the C57 SCID, significantly increased in the BALB/c, and did not change in the C57 WT. The characterization of matrix metalloproteinase induction and activation on day 30 was associated with T-lymphocyte function. The total cardiac fibrillar collagen, percentage of fibrillar collagen cross-linking, and the activity of the cross-linking enzyme lysyl oxidase-like-3 (LOXL-3) significantly decreased in the C57 SCID, significantly increased in the BALB/c, and did not change in the C57 WT. This study revealed that the LOXL-3 pathway, namely, gene expression, enzymatic activities, and LOXL-3-mediated collagen cross-linking, was associated with ventricular stiffness and incongruence with lymphocyte function. These data support the concept that the T lymphocytes may play a fundamental regulatory role in cardiac ECM composition through modulation of collagen synthesis, degradation, and cross-linking.<newchar><newabs>18767971<newchar>The possibility of using multipotent adult bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) for tissue-engineering applications hinges on the ability to predictably control their differentiation. Previously, we showed the osteogenic potential of adult bone marrow-derived MSCs cultured on thin films of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) depends in part on the identity of extracellular matrix (ECM) ligands initially deposited onto the material from serum in the culture medium. Here we have addressed the hypothesis that remodeling of the PLGA surface via the de novo synthesis of ECM proteins by the MSCs may also play an important role in governing their osteogenic differentiation. Supporting this hypothesis, increasing amounts of fibronectin and type-I collagen were synthesized and deposited onto thin-film PLGA substrates, whereas vitronectin levels diminished over a 28-day time course. Integrin expression profiles changed accordingly, with higher levels of alpha2beta1 and alpha5beta1 than alphavbeta3 at three different time points. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidyl inositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathways were also activated in MSCs cultured on these substrates, and their inhibition significantly inhibited osteogenic differentiation as assessed according to alkaline phosphatase activity and mineral deposition. These data indicate that initial ECM deposition, subsequent matrix remodeling, and corresponding integrin expression profiles influence osteogenesis in MSCs cultured on PLGA in part by engaging MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways. Understanding the mechanisms by which stem cells respond to different polymers will be critical in their eventual therapeutic use.<newchar><newabs>15013265<newchar>Recent studies suggest that the plasmin system plays an active role in tissue remodeling. Plasmin degrades the extracellular matrix (ECM), either directly removing glycoproteins from ECM or by activating matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). PAI-1 blocking MMPs may prevent ECM degradation, but inhibiting fibrinolysis leads to fibrin accumulation and fibrosis. Components of the plasmin system including tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), urokinase plasminogen activator (u-PA), and plasminogen activator inhibitors PAI-1 and PAI-2 are synthesised by airway cells, and inflammatory mediators affect their expression. The plasmin system, in turn, actively influences the production of inflammatory mediators and growth factors, extending pathological structural changes in the airway. Modulation of the plasmin system might be a new pharmacological strategy that could inhibit the development of airway remodeling.<newchar><newabs>10881049<newchar>Acute lung injury is characterized by a severe disruption of alveolo-capillary structures and includes a variety of changes in lung cell populations. Evidence suggests the occurrence of rupture of the basement membranes and interstitial matrix remodeling during acute lung injury. The dynamic equilibrium of the extracellular matrix (ECM) under physiological conditions is a consequence of the balance between the regulation of synthesis and degradation of ECM components. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) represent a group of enzymes involved in the degradation of most of the components of the ECM and therefore participate in tissue remodeling associated with pathological situations such as acute lung injury. MMP activity is regulated by proteolytic activation of the latent secreted proenzyme and by interaction with specific tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases. This review details our knowledge of the involvement of MMPs, namely MMP-2 and MMP-9, in acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome.<newchar><newabs>16815886<newchar>Chronic hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is an important factor in development of arterial hypertension. HHcy is associated with activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs); however, it is unclear whether HHcy-dependent extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation plays a role in arterial hypertrophy and hypertension. We tested the hypothesis that in HHcy the mechanism of arterial hypertension involves arterial dysfunction in response to ECM accumulation between endothelial and arterial smooth muscle cells and subsequent endothelium-myocyte (E-M) uncoupling. To decrease plasma Hcy, dietary supplementation with 3-deazaadenosine (DZA), the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor, was administered to cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) knockout (KO) mice. Mice were grouped as follows: wild type (WT; control), WT+DZA, CBSKO, and CBSKO+DZA (n = 4/group). Mean aortic blood pressure and heart rate were monitored in real time with a telemetric system before, during, and after DZA treatment (6 wk total). In vivo aorta function and morphology were analyzed by M-mode and Doppler echocardiography in anesthetized mice. Aorta MMP activity in unfixed cryostat sections was measured with DQ gelatin. Aorta MMP-2, MMP-9, and connexin 43 expression were measured by RT-PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively. HHcy caused increased aortic blood pressure and resistance, tachycardia, and increased wall thickness and ECM accumulation in aortic wall vs. control groups. There was a linear correlation between aortic wall thickness and plasma Hcy levels. MMP-2, MMP-9, and connexin 43 expression were increased in HHcy. In the CBSKO+DZA group, aortic blood pressure and levels of MMP and connexin 43 were close to those found in control groups. However, removal of DZA reversed the aortic lumen-to-wall thickness ratio in CBSKO mice, suggesting, in part, a role of vascular remodeling in the increase in blood pressure in HHcy. The results show that arterial hypertension in HHcy mice is, in part, associated with arterial remodeling and E-M uncoupling in response to MMP activation.<newchar><newabs>15536164<newchar>Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is characterized by extracellular deposition of transthyretin (TTR) aggregates and amyloid fibrils, particularly in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and is accompanied with changes in connective tissue. Given the invasiveness of nerve biopsy, FAP salivary glands (SGs) were used in microarray analysis; biglycan and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), two genes related to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling were overexpressed in FAP. Results were validated by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry both in SG and in nerve biopsies of different stages of disease progression. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), which exists as a complex with NGAL, was also increased in FAP and in vitro degraded TTR aggregates and fibrils; however in the presence of serum amyloid P, a universal amyloid component, TTR fibrils became resistant to MMP-9 proteolysis. Biglycan, NGAL, and MMP-9 are transcriptionally up-regulated by NF-kappaB, a transcription factor that is activated in FAP nerves and SG. Given the relationship between inflammation and ECM remodeling, and the increase of proinflammatory cytokines in FAP, IL-10 expression in FAP nerves was investigated; IL-10 increased after fibril deposition, suggesting a balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory mechanisms. Changes in ECM-related proteins and inflammatory events may be relevant for therapy in FAP and other neurodegenerative disorders.<newchar><newabs>22790791<newchar>Adipose tissue of obese individuals is characterized by increased fibrosis and macrophage infiltration. Extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that occurs during adipogenesis can be influenced by macrophages, but it remains unclear how macrophage-secreted factors alter preadipocyte ECM protein expression under non-adipogenic versus adipogenic conditions. Confluent human subcutaneous abdominal preadipocytes were cultured for 14 days, with or without adipogenic inducers, in either control medium, medium conditioned by THP-1 monocytes (THP-1-MonCM), or medium conditioned by THP-1 macrophages (THP-1-MacCM). Under non-adipogenic conditions in THP-1-MacCM, collagen I/III and fibronectin protein levels rose by 40 and 70 %, respectively (p &lt; 0.05, n = 3; compared to control non-adipogenic medium). When preadipocytes were exposed to adipogenic inducers in THP-1-MacCM, collagen I/III levels increased by 50 %, but those of fibronectin fell by 48 %, both compared to non-adipogenic THP-1-MacCM conditions. The rise in collagen I/III levels contrasts with the 51 % decrease in collagen I/III that occurs with induction of differentiation in control medium, whereas, the decrease in fibronectin is more modest, but consistent in THP-1-MacCM (48 %) and control medium (92 %). A similar effect on fibronectin levels occurred using medium conditioned by LPS-treated human monocyte-derived macrophages (MD-MacCM). Our data indicate macrophage-derived factors regulate levels of collagen I/III and fibronectin in preadipocytes under non-adipogenic and adipogenic conditions. Further studies are needed to determine if these changes in these ECM proteins contribute to the anti-adipogenic action of MacCM.<newchar><newabs>19863222<newchar>BACKGROUND. Preoperative radiotherapy reduces recurrence but increases postoperative morbidity. The aim of this study was to explore the effect of radiotherapy in rectal mucosa and rectal tumour extracellular matrix (ECM) by studying enzymes and growth factors involved in ECM remodeling. MATERIALS AND METHODS. Twenty patients with short-term preoperative radiotherapy and 12 control patients without radiotherapy were studied. Biopsies from rectal mucosa and tumour were collected prior to radiotherapy and at surgery. Tissue MMP-1, -2, -9, TIMP-1, uPA, PAI-1, TGF-beta1 and calprotectin were determined by ELISA. Biopsies from irradiated and non-irradiated peritoneal areas were also analysed. RESULTS. Radiotherapy increased the tissue levels of MMP-2 and PAI-1 in both the rectal mucosa and tumours while calprotectin and uPA showed an increase only in the mucosa after irradiation. The increase of calprotectin was due to an influx of inflammatory cells as revealed by immunohistochemistry. Prior to irradiation, the tumour tissues had increased levels of MMP-1, -2, -9, total TGF-beta1, uPA, PAI-1 and calprotectin compared to mucosa, while TIMP-1 and the active TGF-beta1 fraction showed no statistical difference. CONCLUSIONS. This study indicates a radiation-induced effect on selected ECM remodeling proteases. This reaction may be responsible for early and late morbidity. Interference of this response might reduce these consequences.<newchar><newabs>19065545<newchar>Changes in ventricular extracellular matrix (ECM) composition of pressure overload hypertrophy determine clinical outcomes. The effects of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) transplantation upon determinants of ECM composition in pressure overload hypertrophy have not been studied. Sprague-Dawley rats underwent aortic banding and were followed by echocardiography. After an absolute decrease in fractional shortening of 25% from baseline, 1 x 10(6) MSC (n = 28) or PBS (n = 20) was randomly injected intracoronarily. LV protein analysis, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-6, MMP-9) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1, TIMP-2, TIMP-3), was performed after sacrifice on postoperative day 7, 14, 21 or 28. Left ventricular levels of MMP-3, MMP-6, MMP-9, TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 were demonstrated to be decreased in the MSC group compared with controls after 28 days. Expression of MMP-2 and TIMP-2 remained relatively stable in both groups. Successful MSCs delivery was confirmed by histological analysis and visualization of labelled MSCs. In this model of pressure overload hypertrophy, intracoronary delivery of MSCs during heart failure was associated with specific changes in determinants of ECM composition. LV reverse remodeling was associated with decreased ventricular levels of MMP-3, MMP-6, MMP-9, TIMP-1 and TIMP-3, which were upregulated in the control group as heart failure progressed. These effects were most significant at 28 days following injection.<newchar><newabs>22771579<newchar>Hemicentin 1 (Hmcn1) and Hemicentin 2 (Hmcn2) belong to the fibulin family of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that play pivotal roles during development and homeostasis of a variety of vertebrate tissues. Recently, we have shown that mutations in zebrafish Hmcn1, also called Fibulin 6, lead to massive fin blistering, similar to the defects caused by the Fraser syndrome gene Fras1. In contrast, the role of Hmcn2 during vertebrate development has thus far been uncharacterized. In zebrafish, hmcn2, like fibulin 1 (fbln1), another member of the fibulin family, is predominantly expressed in fin mesenchymal cells and developing somites, contrasting the strict epithelial expression of hmcn1. While antisense morpholino oligonucleotide (MO)-based knockdown of hmcn2 did not yield any discernable defects, hmcn2/fbln1 double knockdown fish displayed blistering in the trunk, pointing to an essential contribution of these proteins from mesodermal sources for proper epidermal-dermal junction formation. In contrast, and unlike hmcn1 mutants, epidermal-dermal junctions in the fin folds of hmcn2/fbln1 double knockdown fish were only moderately affected. Instead, they displayed impaired migration of fin mesenchymal cells into the fin folds, pointing to a crucial role of Hmcn2 and Fbln1 to remodel the ECM of the fin fold interepidermal space, which is a prerequisite for fibroblast ingrowth. TEM analyses suggest that this ECM remodeling occurs at the level of actinotrichia, the collageneous migration substrate of mesenchymal cells, and at the level of cross fibers, which resemble mammalian microfibers. This work provides first insights into the role of Hmcn2 during vertebrate development, identifying it as an evolutionary conserved protein that acts in functional redundancy with Fbln1C and/or Fbln1D isoforms to regulate tissue adhesion and cell migration, while extending the current knowledge of the functions of vertebrate Fbln1.<newchar><newabs>19661340<newchar>Ascorbate has dose-dependent inverse effects on cancer cells growth and expression of matrixmetalloproteinases (MMP) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), which regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. We examined melanoma cell viability and ECM remodeling mechanisms of ascorbate and its modulation by an extract from Polypodium leucotomos (PL) (a fern) via the regulation of apoptosis, heat-shock proteins (HSPs), MMP-1 or tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) that inhibits MMP-1. The dose-dependent regulation of cell viability/proliferation by ascorbate was associated with inverse regulation of apoptosis and stimulation of HSPs at growth-inhibitory concentrations. PL antagonized the stimulation of MMP-1, TGF-beta and HSPs by a growth-inhibitory ascorbate dose and stimulated the expression of TIMP-1, while maintaining growth inhibition. We infer that a combination of ascorbate with PL is beneficial to cancer management via the simultaneous inhibition of cell growth and expression of MMP-1, TGF-beta and HSPs, and furthermore, the stimulation of TIMP-1.<newchar><newabs>19320544<newchar>Autologous fibrin-based tissue-engineered heart valves have demonstrated excellent potential as patient-derived valve replacements. The present pilot study aims to evaluate the structure and mechanical durability of fibrin-based heart valves after implantation in a large-animal model (sheep). Tissue-engineered heart valves were molded using a fibrin scaffold and autologous arterial-derived cells before 28 days of mechanical conditioning. Conditioned valves were subsequently implanted in the pulmonary trunk of the same animals from which the cells were harvested. After 3 months in vivo, explanted valve conduits (n = 4) had remained intact and exhibited native tissue consistency, although leaflets demonstrated insufficiency because of tissue contraction. Routine histology showed remarkable tissue development and cell distribution, along with functional blood vessel ingrowth. A confluent monolayer of endothelial cells was present on the valve surface, as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy and positive von Willebrand factor staining. Immunohistochemistry and extracellular matrix (ECM) assay demonstrated complete resorption of the fibrin scaffold and replacement with ECM proteins. Transmission electron microscopy revealed mature collagen formation and viable, active resident tissue cells. The preliminary findings of implanted fibrin-based tissue-engineered heart valves are encouraging, with excellent tissue remodeling and structural durability after 3 months in vivo. The results from this pilot study highlight the potential for construction of completely &quot;autologous&quot; customized tissue-engineered heart valves based on a patient-derived fibrin scaffold.<newchar><newabs>23720151<newchar>Engineered tissues are commonly stretched or compressed (i.e., conditioned) during culture to stimulate extracellular matrix (ECM) production and to improve the mechanical properties of the growing construct. The relationships between mechanical stimulation and ECM remodeling, however, are complex, interdependent, and dynamic. Thus, theoretical models are required for understanding the underlying phenomena so that the conditioning process can be optimized to produce functional engineered tissues. Here, we continue our development of multiscale mechanical models by simulating the effect of cell tractions on developing isometric tension and redistributing forces in the surrounding fibers of a collagen gel embedded with explants. The model predicted patterns of fiber reorganization that were similar to those observed experimentally. Furthermore, the inclusion of cell compaction also changed the distribution of fiber strains in the gel compared to the acellular case, particularly in the regions around the cells where the highest strains were found.<newchar><newabs>15853739<newchar>Airway remodeling is a major change responsible for irreversible asthmatic airflow restriction. The Th-2 cytokines-dominant eosinophilic inflammatory mechanism cannot fully explain the progressive subepithelial fibrosis and structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the key enzymes responsible for ECM degradation. MMPs are normally produced and secreted under the tight regulation of, at least, 3 different levels: the gene transcriptional level, the activation of the latent form of enzyme, and the inactivation by specific endogenous inhibitors. In asthmatic condition, as shown by the large amount of accumulated evidence in this review, MMP-9 is the most relevant among the 23 kinds of human MMPs at present detected. Although the mechanism is still under investigation and not accurately known, the imbalance between MMP-9 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 is considered a major theory to explain the progression of asthmatic airway remodeling. Various inflammatory cytokines including TGF beta and growth factors play a pivotal role in MMP-9 production and secretion. This review mainly focuses upon the pivotal role of MMP-9 in airway remodeling, and also upon major cellular source of MMP-9 in asthma such as eosinophils, neutrophils, epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages. This review also refers to the partial contribution of nitric oxide to MMP-9 in asthma.<newchar><newabs>17172637<newchar>In four independent yeast two-hybrid screens with the integrin alpha-subunits alpha3A, alpha6A, alpha7A, and alpha7B, we identified the Mss4 protein, a nucleotide exchange factor for exocytic Rab GTPases, as a novel integrin interacting protein. We have previously shown that it binds to the conserved KXGFFKR region of integrin alpha-subunits located directly beneath the cell membrane. Here we show that the binding site for integrins on Mss4 is overlapping with those for Rab GTPases. Functional analysis of the Mss4/integrin interaction revealed its importance for activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and remodeling of secreted extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The exocytosis of all the proteins analyzed, however, was unaffected. Furthermore, our data suggest that Mss4 drives the coordinated action of the MT1-MMP/integrin protein complex, thus regulating the presence and activation of MT1-MMP at newly formed filopodia and lamellipodia. This in turn facilitates the conversion of pro-MMPs to MMPs, resulting in cleavage and remodeling of ECM proteins. C2C12 myoblasts with stably down-regulated Mss4 showed a disturbed fibronectin remodeling during differentiation, resulting in malfunctioned myotube formation.<newchar><newabs>19416202<newchar>Stem cell transplantation is a promising approach for treatment of the postinfarcted heart and prevention of deleterious cardiac remodeling and heart failure. We explored this issue by transplanting mouse C2C12 myoblasts, genetically engineered to express enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) or eGFP and relaxin (eGFP/RLX), into swine with chronic myocardial infarction. One month later, C2C12 myoblasts selectively settled in the ischemic scar around blood vessels, showing an activated endothelium (ICAM-1 and VCAM positive). Although unable to differentiate to a muscle phenotype, these cells induced extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by matrix metalloprotease secretion and increased microvessel density by vascular endothelial growth factor expression. C2C12/RLX myoblasts gave better results than C2C12/GFP. By echocardiography, C2C12-engrafted swine, especially those that received C2C12/RLX, showed better heart contractility than the untreated controls. Hence, the advantage afforded by the grafted myoblasts on cardiac function is primarily dependent on their paracrine effects on ECM remodeling and vascularization.<newchar><newabs>11487021<newchar>Vascular remodeling, defined as lasting structural changes in the vessel wall in response to hemodynamic stimuli, plays a role in many (patho)physiological processes requiring cell migration and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Two proteolytic systems, the fibrinolytic (plasminogen/plasmin) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) systems can degrade most ECM components. The availability of mice models with deficiency of main components of both systems has allowed to study their contribution to vascular remodeling in several biological processes. In mouse models of atherosclerosis, urokinase-mediated plasmin generation plays a role in activation of several macrophage-derived MMPs (MMP-3, -9, -12 and -13), triggering elastolysis and collagenolysis, resulting in media destruction and aneurysm formation. Neointima formation after vascular injury, a process that depends on smooth muscle cell migration, is reduced in mice with plasminogen or urokinase deficiency and enhanced in mice with deficiency of TIMP-1 (type 1 tissue inhibitor of MMPs). Also in allograft transplant arteriosclerosis and in abdominal aortic aneurysm both proteolytic systems contribute to matrix degradation. In a mouse model of myocardial infarction, urokinase deficiency protects totally and MMP-9 deficiency partially against cardiac rupture, but these animals suffer cardiac failure. Thus, the plasminogen/plasmin and MMP systems, in concert, contribute to vascular remodeling in the setting of cardiovascular disease.<newchar><newabs>23994158<newchar>Adenosine (ADO) is a retaliatory metabolite that is expressed in conditions of injury or stress. During these conditions ATP is released at the extracellular level and is metabolized to adenosine. For this reason, adenosine is defined as a &quot;danger signal&quot; for cells and organs, in addition to its important role as homeostatic regulator. Its physiological functions are mediated through interaction with four specific transmembrane receptors called ADORA1, ADORA2A, ADORA2B and ADORA3. In the lungs of mice and humans all four adenosine receptors are expressed with different roles, having pro- and anti-inflammatory roles, determining bronchoconstriction and regulating lung inflammation and airway remodeling. Adenosine receptors can also promote differentiation of lung fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, typical of the fibrotic event. This last function suggests a potential involvement of adenosine in the fibrotic lung disease processes, which are characterized by different degrees of inflammation and fibrosis. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the pathology with the highest degree of fibrosis and is of unknown etiology and burdened by lack of effective treatments in humans.<newchar>1-deoxy-1,6[[(3-iodophenyl)methyl]amino]-9H-purin-9yl-N-methyl-B-d-ribofuronamide<n-term>1-propyl-8-p-sulfophenulxanthine<n-term>2 hexynyl-5′-N ethylcarboxamidoadenosine<n-term>2-(2-phenyl)ethynyl-N-ethylcarboxamido-adenosine<n-term>2-CI-IB MECA<n-term>2-chloro-N6-cyclopentyladenosine<n-term>2-cloro-N6-(3-iodobenzyl)-adenosine-50-N methyluronamide<n-term>2-methyl-6-phenyl-4-phenylethynyl-1,4-dihydro-pyridine-3,5-dicarboxylicacid-3-ethyl ester-5-(4-nitro-benzyl)ester<n-term>2-p-(2-carboxyethyl) phenethylamino-50-N-ethyl-carboxamidoadenosine<n-term>2-phenyl hydroxypropynyl-5′-N-ethylcarboxamido adenosine phosphoinositide 3<n-term>3-ethyl-1-propyl-8-(1-(3-(trifluoromethyl) benzyl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl)-1H-purine-2,6(3H,7H)-dione<n-term>3-ethyl-5-benzyl-2-methyl-4-phenylethynyl-6-phenyl-1,4-(±)-dihydropyridine-3,5-dicarboxylate<n-term>3-propyl-6-ethyl-5-[(ethylthio)carbonyl]-2-phenyl-4-propyl-3-pyridinecarboxylate<n-term>4-(2-[7-amino-2-(2-furyl)-{1,2,4}-triazolo{2,3-a}{1,3,5}triazin-5-ylamino]ethyl)pieno<n-term>5-[[(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]carbonyl]amino-8-methyl-2-(2-furyl)pyra-zolo[4,3-e]1,2,4-triazolo[1,5-c]pyrimidine<n-term>7-methyl-[11C]-(E)-8-(3-bromostyryl)-3,7-dimethyl-1-propargylxanthin<n-term>8-[4-[[[[(2-aminoethyl)amino]carbonyl]methyl]oxy]phenyl]-l,3-dipropylxanthine<n-term>8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine<n-term>9-chloro-2-(2-furanyl)-5-[(phenylacetyl) amino] [1,2,4]-triazolo[1,5-c]quinazoline<n-term>9-chloro-2-(2-furanyl)-[1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-c]quinazolin-5-amine<n-term>A(1)R<n-term>A(2A)R<n-term>A(2B)R<n-term>A(3)R<n-term>AB-MECA<n-term>ADA<n-term>ADO<n-term>ADORA 1 receptor<n-term>ADORA 2A receptor<n-term>ADORA 2B receptor<n-term>ADORA 3 receptor<n-term>ADP<n-term>AIP<n-term>AK<n-term>AMP<n-term>ARs<n-term>ATP<n-term>Adenosine<n-term>Adenosine receptors<n-term>Bleomycin<n-term>CCPA<n-term>CD39<n-term>CD73<n-term>CGS 15943<n-term>CGS21680<n-term>CHA<n-term>CNS<n-term>CNT-1<n-term>CNT-2<n-term>COP<n-term>COPD<n-term>CPA<n-term>CVT6883<n-term>DAG<n-term>DIP<n-term>DPCPX<n-term>E-8-(3,4-dimethoxystyryl)-1,3-dipropyl-7-methylxanthine<n-term>ECM<n-term>ENT-1<n-term>ENT-2<n-term>ET-1<n-term>FITC<n-term>HE-NECA<n-term>IB-MECA<n-term>IIPs<n-term>ILD<n-term>INO<n-term>IPF<n-term>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis<n-term>KF17837<n-term>LIP<n-term>Lung disease<n-term>MAP<n-term>MRE3008-F207<n-term>MRS 1191<n-term>MRS 1220<n-term>MRS 1334<n-term>MRS 1523<n-term>MRS 1754<n-term>N-(4-cyanophenyl)-2-[4-(2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-2,6-dioxo-1,3-dipropyl-1H-purin-8-yl)-phenoxy]acetamide<n-term>N-ethylcarboxamido-adenosine<n-term>N6-(2-phenylisopropyl)adenosine<n-term>N6-(4-aminobenzyl)-adenosine-5′-N-methyluronamidedihydrochloride<n-term>N6-cyclohexyl adenosine<n-term>N6-cyclopentyladenosine<n-term>NECA<n-term>NSPI<n-term>PAH<n-term>PENECA<n-term>PHPNECA<n-term>PIA<n-term>PKC<n-term>PLA2<n-term>PLC<n-term>PLD<n-term>PSB1115<n-term>RB-ILD<n-term>ROS<n-term>SCH-58261<n-term>UIP<n-term>XAC<n-term>ZM 241385<n-term>[11C]BS-DMPX<n-term>[7-(2-phenylethyl)-5-amino-2-(2-furyl)-pyrazolo-(4,3-e)-1,2,4-triazolo(1,5-c) pyrimidine]<n-term>acute interstitial pneumonia<n-term>adenosine<n-term>adenosine deaminase<n-term>adenosine diphosphate<n-term>adenosine kinase<n-term>adenosine monophosphate<n-term>adenosine receptors<n-term>adenosine triphosphate<n-term>cAMP<n-term>central nervous system<n-term>chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases<n-term>concentrative nucleoside transporters-1<n-term>concentrative nucleoside transporters-2<n-term>cryptogenic organizing pneumonia<n-term>cyclic adenosine monophosphate<n-term>desquamative interstitial pneumonia<n-term>diacylglycerol<n-term>ecto-5′-nucleotidase<n-term>ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase<n-term>endothelin 1<n-term>equilibrative nucleoside transporters-1<n-term>equilibrative nucleoside transporters-2<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fluorescein isothiocyanate<n-term>idiopathic interstitial pneumonias<n-term>idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis<n-term>inosine<n-term>interstitial lung disease<n-term>lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia<n-term>mitogen-activated protein<n-term>nonspecific interstitial pneumonia<n-term>phospholipase A2<n-term>phospholipase C<n-term>phospholipase D<n-term>protein kinase C<n-term>pulmonary arterial hypertension<n-term>reactive oxygen specie<n-term>respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial lung disease<n-term>usual interstitial pneumonia<n-term><newabs>21154244<newchar>We recently demonstrated that blood clotted around biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP) microparticles constituted a composite biomaterial that could be used for bone defect filling. In addition, we showed that mononuclear cells, i.e. monocytes and lymphocytes, play a central role in the osteogenic effect of this biomaterial. Hypothesizing that osteoclast progenitors could participate to the pro-osteogenic effect of mononuclear cells we observed previously, we focus on this population through the study of mouse monocyte/macrophage cells (RAW264.7 cell line), as well as human pre-osteoclastic cells derived from mononuclear hematopoietic progenitor cells (monocytes-enriched fraction from peripheral blood). Using monocyte-derived osteoclast progenitors cultured within plasma clot/BCP microparticles composite, we aimed in the present report at the elucidation of transcriptional profiles of genes related to osteoclastogenesis and to bone remodelling. For both human and mouse monocytes, real-time PCR experiments demonstrated that plasma clot/BCP scaffold potentiated the expression of marker genes of the osteoclast differentiation such as Nfactc1, Jdp2, Fra2, Tracp and Ctsk. By contrast, Mmp9 was induced in mouse but not in human cells, and Ctr expression was down regulated for both species. In addition, for both mouse and human precursors, osteoclastic differentiation was associated with a strong stimulation of VegfC and Sdf1 genes expression. At last, using field-emission scanning electron microscopy analysis, we observed the interactions between human monocytes and BCP microparticles. As a whole, we demonstrated that plasma clot/BCP microparticles composite provided monocytes with a suitable microenvironment allowing their osteoclastic differentiation, together with the production of pro-angiogenic and chemoattractant factors.<newchar><newabs>19176890<newchar>Medial thickening and vascular hypertrophy of resistance arteries can lead to cardiovascular complications associated with diabetes. While previous studies have established a role of type 1 diabetes in vascular remodeling, we recently extended these observations to type 2 diabetes and reported increased collagen deposition due to alterations in matrix metalloproteinase expression and activity in mesenteric resistance arteries. These studies also showed that remodeling response was mediated by endothelin-1 (ET-1) via activation of ET(A) receptors, whereas blockade of ET(B) receptors exacerbated the remodeling. However, the effectiveness of glycemic control strategies in preventing these vascular changes, including activation of the ET system still remained unclear. Also, very little is known about whether and to what extent reorganization of the extracellular matrix (ECM) affects vascular compliance and vasomotor tone. Accordingly, this study assessed structural remodeling of mesenteric microvessels, vascular compliance, and myogenic tone, as well as the role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) in mediating these processes. Spontaneously diabetic, non-obese Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, a model for type 2 diabetes, and normoglycemic Wistar rats were used for the studies. A subset of GK rats were administered metformin to achieve euglycemia. Glycemic control normalized the increased media-to-lumen ratios (M/L) and myogenic tone seen in diabetes, as well as normalizing plasma ET-1 levels and mesenteric ET(A) receptor expression. There was increased collagen synthesis in diabetes paralleled by decreased collagenase MMP-13 activity, while glycemic control attenuated the process. These findings and our previous study taken together suggest that hyperglycemia-mediated activation of ET-1 and ET(A) receptors alter vascular structure and mechanics in type 2 diabetes.<newchar><newabs>23328900<newchar>Solid tumors consist of genetically and phenotypically diverse subpopulations of cancer cells with unique capacities for growth, differentiation, and invasion. While the molecular and microenvironmental bases for heterogeneity are increasingly appreciated, the outcomes of such intratumor heterogeneity, particularly in the context of tumor invasion and metastasis, remain poorly understood. To study heterotypic cell-cell interactions and elucidate the biological consequences of intratumor heterogeneity, we developed a tissue-engineered multicellular spheroid (MCS) co-culture model that recapitulates the cellular diversity and fully three-dimensional cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions that characterize human carcinomas. We found that &quot;invasion-competent&quot; malignant cells induced the collective invasion of otherwise &quot;invasion-incompetent&quot; epithelial cells, and that these two cell types consistently exhibited distinct leader and follower roles during invasion. Analysis of extracellular matrix (ECM) microarchitecture revealed that malignant cell invasion was accompanied by extensive ECM remodeling including matrix alignment and proteolytic track-making. Inhibition of cell contractility- and proteolysis-mediated matrix reorganization prevented leader-follower behavior and malignant cell-induced epithelial cell invasion. These results indicate that heterogeneous subpopulations within a tumor may possess specialized roles during tumor progression and suggest that complex interactions among the various subpopulations of cancer cells within a tumor may regulate critical aspects of tumor biology and affect clinical outcome.<newchar><newabs>24292524<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common joint disease characterized by destruction of articular cartilage induced primarily by mechanical stresses to joints. Destruction of the articular cartilage in OA is caused by combination of increased degradation of ECM (extracellular matrix) , decreased production of ECM and chondrocyte death. Members of the MMP (matrix metalloproteinase) and ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) gene families are considered to play a key role in the degradation of cartilage.<newchar><newabs>22609523<newchar>Numerous studies demonstrated increased expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and activation of focal adhesion (FA) signaling pathways in models of pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy. However, little is known about FA signaling in response to volume overload where cardiac hypertrophy is associated with ECM loss. This study examines the role of beta1-adrenergic receptors (β(1)-ARs) in FA signaling changes and myocyte apoptosis induced during acute hemodynamic stress of volume overload. Rats with eccentric cardiac hypertrophy induced after aorto-caval fistula (ACF) develop reduced interstitial collagen content and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of key FA signaling molecules FAK, Pyk(2) and paxillin along with an increase in cardiac myocyte apoptosis. ACF also increased activation of PTEN, a dual lipid and protein phosphatase, and its interaction with FA proteins. β(1)-AR blockade (extended-release of metoprolol succinate, 100mg QD) markedly attenuated PTEN activation, restored FA signaling and reduced myocyte apoptosis induced by ACF at 2days, but failed to reduce interstitial collagen loss and left ventricular dilatation. Treating cultured myocytes with β(1)-AR agonists or adenoviral expression of β(1)-ARs caused PTEN activation and interaction with FA proteins, thus leading to FA signaling downregulation and myocyte apoptosis. Adenoviral-mediated expression of a catalytically inactive PTEN mutant or wild-type FAK restored FA signaling downregulation and attenuated myocyte apoptosis induced by β(1)-ARs. Collectively, these data show that β(1)-AR stimulation in response to ACF induces FA signaling downregulation through an ECM-independent mechanism. This effect involves PTEN activation and may contribute to adverse cardiac remodeling and function in the course of volume overload.<newchar><newabs>17915152<newchar>Defects in the synthesis and breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are now seen as key processes in the development of atherosclerosis and its thrombotic complications. Correlations have been observed between circulating levels of ECM biomarkers and the clinical manifestations of and risk factors for atherosclerosis. Several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), endopeptidases that can degrade the ECM, such as MMP-9 and MMP-10, play important roles in the pathophysiology of atherothrombosis and contribute to the expansion of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Moreover, they may also be useful biomarkers of atherosclerotic risk and serve as predictors of coronary and cerebrovascular disease recurrence. Although at present the effect of tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs) on cardiovascular disease prognosis is still uncertain, the ECM could be a promising therapeutic target in atherothrombotic disease, and several MMP inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical trials.<newchar><newabs>23845850<newchar>Neoangiogenesis and the development of an abnormal angio-architecture in the liver are strongly linked with progressive fibrogenesis. This study aimed to evaluate the ability of curcumin to protect liver fibrosis-associated angiogenesis and capillarization of the sinusoids in experimental rats. Liver fibrosis was induced by intraperitoneal injection of carbon tetrachloride (CCl₄) with or without curcumin for 6 weeks. The results suggest that curcumin treatment markedly attenuated CCl₄-induced liver fibrosis, as assessed by histology and hydroxyproline content, and inhibited hepatic stellate cell activation. Curcumin ameliorated hepatic angiogenesis, as assessed by measuring microvessel density using Von Willebrand factor staining and by examining the expression of the endothelial cell markers CD31 and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2 in the livers. Pathologic remodeling of liver sinusoidal capillarization, as assessed by electron-microscopic analysis of Disse's space and by evaluation of the levels of basement membrane protein expression, was also attenuated by curcumin administration. The intrahepatic gene or protein expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, VEGFR-1, placental growth factor, and cyclooxygenase-2 decreased with treatment with curcumin in fibrotic rats. In conclusion, curcumin ameliorates hepatic angiogenesis and sinusoidal capillarization in CCl₄-induced rat liver fibrosis through suppressing multiple proangiogenic factors.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>CCl(4)<n-term>COX-2<n-term>Cirrhosis<n-term>Curcumin<n-term>ECM<n-term>HIF-1α<n-term>HMGB1<n-term>HSC<n-term>Liver fibrosis<n-term>PlGF<n-term>SECs<n-term>Sinusoidal capillarization<n-term>TEM<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>TNF-α<n-term>VEGF<n-term>VEGFR<n-term>alpha-smooth muscle actin<n-term>carbon tetrachloride<n-term>cyclooxygenase-2<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hepatic stellate cells<n-term>high-mobility group box 1<n-term>hypoxia-inducible factor-1α<n-term>placental growth factor<n-term>sinusoidal endothelial cells<n-term>transforming growth factor-beta1<n-term>transmission electron microscopy<n-term>tumor necrosis factor<n-term>vWF<n-term>vascular endothelial growth factor<n-term>vascular endothelial growth factor receptor<n-term>von Willebrand factor<n-term>α-SMA<n-term><newabs>22790326<newchar>Decreased elastin in mice (Eln+/-) yields a functioning vascular system with elevated blood pressure and increased arterial stiffness that is morphologically distinct from wild-type mice (WT). Yet, function is retained enough that there is no appreciable effect on life span and some mechanical properties are maintained constant. It is not understood how the mouse modifies the normal developmental process to produce a functioning vascular system despite a deficiency in elastin. To quantify changes in mechanical properties, we have applied a fiber-based constitutive model to mechanical data from the ascending aorta during postnatal development of WT and Eln+/- mice. Results indicate that the fiber-based constitutive model is capable of distinguishing elastin amounts and identifying trends during development. We observe an increase in predicted circumferential stress contribution from elastin with age, which correlates with increased elastin amounts from protein quantification data. The model also predicts changes in the unloaded collagen fiber orientation with age, which must be verified in future work. In Eln+/- mice, elastin amounts are decreased at each age, along with the predicted circumferential stress contribution of elastin. Collagen amounts in Eln+/- aorta are comparable to WT, but the predicted circumferential stress contribution of collagen is increased. This may be due to altered organization or structure of the collagen fibers. Relating quantifiable changes in arterial mechanics with changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) protein amounts will help in understanding developmental remodeling and in producing treatments for human diseases affecting ECM proteins.<newchar><newabs>16649228<newchar>The extracellular matrix derived from porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS-ECM), an FDA-approved material currently used clinically for rotator cuff repair, has been shown to attract bone marrow-derived cells during in vivo remodeling of a subcutaneous implant and produce chemoattractant peptides following chemical degradation in vitro. The purpose of the present study was to determine if bone marrow-derived cells participate in the long-term remodeling of the Achilles tendon in a mouse model when repaired with SIS-ECM. A 2-mm gap was produced in the Achilles tendon of 40 chimeric mice produced to express green fluorescent protein (GFP) in all of their bone marrow-derived cells. Tendons were repaired by replacing the resected section with autologous tendon tissue or with a single layer sheet of lyophilized SIS-ECM. Four animals from each treatment group were sacrificed at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 weeks, and sections were harvested for histologic and fluorescence microscopy. Both groups showed accumulation of GFP-expressing marrow-derived cells at the site of tendon remodeling at 1 and 2 weeks that were associated with areas of angiogenesis and inflammation. By 16 weeks, the SIS-ECM-treated group showed GFP expressing cells throughout the remodeled tendon in the absence of any inflammatory response, while the autologous tendon repair group showed no GFP expressing cells within the tendon except for occasional cells in the lumen of blood vessels. An SIS-ECM scaffold used for tendon repair recruits a population of bone marrow-derived cells that participates in the long-term remodeling process. The ability of SIS-ECM to recruit a population of marrow-derived cells to the remodeling site may alter the default mechanism of tendon healing. The involvement of these cells in the remodeling process may explain in part the process of site specific constructive remodeling as opposed to scar tissue formation when the ECM is used as a biologic scaffold for tendon reconstruction.<newchar><newabs>23684626<newchar>Adult tissue plasticity, cell reprogramming, and organ regeneration are major challenges in the field of modern regenerative medicine. Devising strategies to increase the regenerative capacity of tissues holds great promise for dealing with donor organ shortages and low transplantation outcomes and also provides essential impetus to tissue bioengineering approaches for organ repair and replacement. The inherent ability of cells to reprogram their fate by switching into an embryonic-like, pluripotent progenitor state is an evolutionary vestige that in mammals has been retained mostly in fetal tissues and persists only in a few organs of the adult body. Tissue regeneration reflects the capacity of terminally differentiated cells to re-enter the cell cycle and proliferate in response to acute injury or environmental stress signals. In lower vertebrates, this regenerative capacity extends to several organs and remarkably culminates in precise tissue patterning, through cellular transdifferentiation and complex morphogenetic processes that can faithfully reconstruct entire body parts. Many lessons have been learned from robust regeneration models in amphibians such as the newt and axolotl. However, the dynamic interactions between the regenerating tissue, the surrounding stroma, and the host immune response, as it adapts to the actively proliferating tissue, remain ill-defined. The regenerating zone, through a sequence of distinct molecular events, adopts phenotypic plasticity and undergoes rigorous tissue remodeling that, in turn, evokes a significant inflammatory response. Complement is a primordial sentinel of the innate immune response that engages in multiple inflammatory cascades as it becomes activated during tissue injury and remodeling. In this respect, complement proteins have been implicated in tissue and organ regeneration in both urodeles and mammals. Distinct complement-triggered pathways have been shown to modulate critical responses that promote tissue reprogramming, pattern formation, and regeneration across phylogenesis. This article will discuss the mechanistic insights underlying the crosstalk of complement with cytokine and growth factor signaling pathways that drive tissue regeneration and will provide a unified conceptual framework for considering complement modulation as a novel target for regenerative therapeutics.<newchar>ASP<n-term>Anaphylatoxins<n-term>C3a receptor<n-term>C3aR<n-term>C5a receptor<n-term>C5aR<n-term>CCl(4)<n-term>Complement<n-term>DAMPs<n-term>ECM<n-term>EMT<n-term>HSCs<n-term>HSPCs<n-term>IPE<n-term>Inflammation<n-term>Innate immunity<n-term>MAC<n-term>MSCs<n-term>PHx<n-term>RPE<n-term>Tissue plasticity<n-term>Vertebrate regeneration<n-term>acylation-stimulating protein<n-term>carbon tetrachloride<n-term>danger-associated molecular patterns<n-term>epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>hematopoietic stem cells<n-term>hematopoietic stem-like progenitor cells<n-term>iris pigmented epithelial<n-term>membrane attack complex<n-term>mesenchymal stem cells<n-term>partial hepatectomy<n-term>retinal pigmented epithelium<n-term><newabs>15929979<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases are a family of proteases capable of degrading various components of the extracellular matrix. Expression studies have implicated the involvement of the matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-3 (ST3) in tissue remodeling and pathogenesis. However, the in vivo role of ST3 has been difficult to study because of a lack of good animal models. Here we used intestinal remodeling during thyroid hormone-dependent metamorphosis of Xenopus laevis as a model to investigate in vivo the role of ST3 during postembryonic organ development in vertebrates. We generated transgenic tadpoles expressing ST3 under control of a heat shock-inducible promoter. We showed for the first time in vivo that wild type ST3 but not a catalytically inactive mutant was sufficient to induce larval epithelial cell death and fibroblast activation, events that normally occur only in the presence of thyroid hormone. We further demonstrated that these changes in cell fate are associated with altered gene expression in the intestine and remodeling of the intestinal basal lamina. These results thus suggest that ST3 regulates cell fate and tissue morphogenesis through direct or indirect ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23330737<newchar>The zinc-dependent matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key enzymes associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling; they play critical roles under both physiological and pathological conditions. MMP-9 activity is linked to many pathological processes, including rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, gastric ulcer, tumor growth, and cancer metastasis. Specific inhibition of MMP-9 activity may be a promising target for therapy for diseases characterized by dysregulated ECM turnover. Potent MMP-9 inhibitors including an indole scaffold were recently reported in an X-ray crystallographic study. Herein, we addressed whether melatonin, a secretory product of pineal gland, has an inhibitory effect on MMP-9 function. Gelatin zymographic analysis showed a significant reduction in pro- and active MMP-9 activity in vitro in a dose- and time-dependent manner. In addition, a human gastric adenocarcinoma cell line (AGS) exhibited a reduced (~50%) MMP-9 expression when incubated with melatonin, supporting an inhibitory effect of melatonin on MMP-9. Atomic-level interaction between melatonin and MMP-9 was probed with computational chemistry tools. Melatonin docked into the active site cleft of MMP-9 and interacted with key catalytic site residues including the three histidines that form the coordination complex with the catalytic zinc as well as proline 421 and alanine 191. We hypothesize that under physiological conditions, tight binding of melatonin in the active site might be involved in reducing the catalytic activity of MMP-9. This finding could provide a novel approach to physical docking of biomolecules to the catalytic site of MMPs, which inhibits this protease, to arrest MMP-9-mediated inflammatory signals.<newchar>inhibitor<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase‐9<n-term>melatonin<n-term><newabs>23623554<newchar>The release of membrane vesicles from the surface of cells into their surrounding environment is now recognized as an important pathway for the delivery of proteins to extracellular sites of biological function. Membrane vesicles of this kind, termed exosomes and ectosomes, are the result of active processes and have been shown to carry a wide array of biological effector molecules that can play roles in cell-to-cell communication and remodeling of the extracellular space. Degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) through the regulated release of proteolytic enzymes is a key process for development, morphogenesis, and cell migration in animal and plant cells. Here we show that the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas achieves the timely degradation of its mother cell wall, a type of ECM, through the budding of ectosomes directly from the membranes of its flagella. Using a combination of immunoelectron microscopy, immunofluorescence microscopy, and functional analysis, we demonstrate that these vesicles, which we term ciliary ectosomes, act as carriers of the proteolytic enzyme necessary for the liberation of daughter cells following mitosis. Chlamydomonas has proven to be the key unicellular model for the highly conserved mechanisms of mammalian cilia, and our results suggest that cilia may be an underappreciated source of bioactive, extracellular membrane vesicles.<newchar><newabs>23160657<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) is a member of a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases capable of degrading extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. A single bout of exercise increases levels of activated MMP-9 in skeletal muscle and in the circulation. However, whether the exercise-induced activation of MMP-9 is associated with ECM remodeling and the cellular source behind MMP-9 in the circulation is not known. In the present study ten healthy male subjects performed a single cycle exercise bout and arterial and venous femoral blood was collected. To test if exercise induces basal lamina degradation and if circulating levels of MMP-9 is related to a release from the exercising muscle, arteriovenous differences of collagen IV and MMP-9 were measured by ELISA and zymography, respectively. Furthermore, markers of neutrophil degranulation elastase and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) were measured by ELISA. Plasma levels of collagen IV increased during the exercise bout and an increased arteriovenous difference of collagen IV was noted at 27 min of exercise. Plasma levels of MMP-9 were increased at both 27 and 57 min of exercise but no arteriovenous difference was noted. No changes over time were detected for elastase and NGAL. The observed release of collagen IV from the exercising muscle indicate basal lamina turnover following a single bout of exercise. No detectable release of MMP-9 was observed, suggesting that the increase in plasma MMP-9 could come from a source other than the skeletal muscle.<newchar><newabs>18849439<newchar>Caveolin-1 (cav1) is a 22-kDa membrane protein essential to the formation of small invaginations in the plasma membrane, called caveolae. The cav1 gene is expressed primarily in adherent cells such as endothelial and smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts. Caveolae contain a variety of signaling receptors, and cav1 notably downregulates transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta signal transduction. In pulmonary pathologies such as interstitial fibrosis or emphysema, altered mechanical properties of the lungs are often associated with abnormal ECM deposition. In this study, we examined the physiological functions and the deposition of ECM in cav1(-/-) mice at various ages (1-12 mo). Cav1(-/-) mice lack caveolae and by 3 mo of age have significant reduced lung compliance and increased elastance and airway resistance. Pulmonary extravasation of fluid, as part of the cav1(-/-) mouse phenotype, probably contributed to the alteration of compliance, which was compounded by a progressive increase in deposition of collagen fibrils in airways and parenchyma. We also found that the increased elastance was caused by abundant elastic fiber deposition primarily around airways in cav1(-/-) mice at least 3 mo old. These observed changes in the ECM composition probably also contribute to the increased airway resistance. The higher deposition of collagen and elastic fibers was associated with increased tropoelastin and col1alpha2 and col3alpha1 gene expression in lung tissues, which correlated tightly with increased TGF-beta/Smad signal transduction. Our study illustrates that perturbation of cav1 function may contribute to several pulmonary pathologies as the result of the important role played by cav1, as part of the TGF-beta signaling pathway, in the regulation of the pulmonary ECM.<newchar><newabs>24176790<newchar>Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for &gt;80% of lung cancer cases and currently has an overall five-year survival rate of only 15%. Patients presenting with advanced stage NSCLC die within 18-months of diagnosis. Metastatic spread accounts for &gt;70% of these deaths. Thus elucidation of the mechanistic basis of NSCLC-metastasis has potential to impact on patient quality of life and survival. Research on NSCLC metastasis has recently expanded to include non-cancer cell components of tumors-the stromal cellular compartment and extra-cellular matrix components comprising the tumor-microenvironment. Metastasis (from initial primary tumor growth through angiogenesis, intravasation, survival in the bloodstream, extravasation and metastatic growth) is an inefficient process and few released cancer cells complete the entire process. Micro-environmental interactions assist each of these steps and discovery of the mechanisms by which tumor cells co-operate with the micro-environment are uncovering key molecules providing either biomarkers or potential drug targets. The major sites of NSCLC metastasis are brain, bone, adrenal gland and the liver. The mechanistic basis of this tissue-tropism is beginning to be elucidated offering the potential to target stromal components of these tissues thus targeting therapy to the tissues affected. This review covers the principal steps involved in tumor metastasis. The role of cell-cell interactions, ECM remodeling and autocrine/paracrine signaling interactions between tumor cells and the surrounding stroma is discussed. The mechanistic basis of lung cancer metastasis to specific organs is also described. The signaling mechanisms outlined have potential to act as future drug targets minimizing lung cancer metastatic spread and morbidity.<newchar>Chemotaxis<n-term>Lung cancer<n-term>Metastasis<n-term>Metastatic niche<n-term>Micro-environment<n-term>Organ-tropism<n-term><newabs>24765144<newchar>Semaphorin-3A is a chemorepellent guidance protein that is crucial in regulating the tumor microenvironment. MMP-14, a membrane-anchored matrix metalloproteinase, is closely associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and cell migration in the progression of cancer metastasis. In the present study, the correlation between the expression levels of semaphorin-3A and MMP-14, and their subsequent prognostic significance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), was investigated. The expression of semaphorin-3A and MMP-14 protein levels was analyzed in 94 cases of NSCLC tissues and in 80 cases of normal lung tissues, using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Correlation and survival analysis were used to further investigate their association and prognostic value. The results revealed that the NSCLC tissues exhibited a lower expression of semaphorin-3A and a higher expression of MMP-14 than in the control lung tissues. The downregulation of semaphorin-3A and upregulation of MMP-14 may promote pleural invasion, lymph node metastasis, vascular invasion and proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression. The expression of semaphorin-3A was correlated with the maximum diameter of tumor. There was a negative correlation between the protein expression levels of semaphorin-3A and MMP-14 in NSCLC tissues. Furthermore, we identified that the patients with lower expression of semaphorin-3A and a higher expression of MMP-14 had worse disease prognosis. The data suggest that lower expression of semaphorin-3A and a higher expression of MMP-14 may promote occurrence and development in NSCLC and that the combined detection of semaphorin-3A and MMP-14 protein may be a helpful tool in predicting the prognosis of NSCLC.<newchar>MMP-14<n-term>NSCLC<n-term>biomarker<n-term>prognosis<n-term>semaphorin-3A<n-term><newabs>23376132<newchar>Endogenous repair of fibrous connective tissues is limited, and there exist few successful strategies to improve healing after injury. As such, new methods that advance repair by promoting cell growth, extracellular matrix (ECM) production, and tissue integration would represent a marked clinical advance. Using the meniscus as a test platform, we sought to develop an enzyme-releasing scaffold that enhances integrative repair. We hypothesized that the high ECM density and low cellularity of native tissue present physical and biological barriers to endogenous healing, and that localized collagenase treatment might expedite cell migration to the wound edge and tissue remodeling. To test this hypothesis, we fabricated a delivery system in which collagenase was stored inside electrospun poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) nanofibers and released upon hydration. In vitro results showed that partial digestion of the wound interface improved repair by creating a microenvironment that facilitated cell migration, proliferation and matrix deposition. Specifically, treatment with high-dose collagenase led to a 2-fold increase in cell density at the wound margin and a 2-fold increase in integrative tissue compared to untreated controls at 4 weeks (P≤0.05). Furthermore, when composite scaffolds containing both collagenase-releasing and structural fiber fractions were placed inside meniscal tears in vitro, enzyme release acted locally and resulted in a positive cellular response similar to that of global treatment with aqueous collagenase. This innovative approach to targeted enzyme delivery may aid the many patients that exhibit meniscal tears by promoting integration of the defect, thereby circumventing the pathologic consequences of partial meniscus removal, and may find widespread application in the treatment of injuries to a variety of dense connective tissues.<newchar><newabs>21562428<newchar>Hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a deadly disease characterized by progressive remodeling and persistent vasoconstriction of the pulmonary arterial system. Remodeling of the pulmonary artery (PA) involves smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation, hypertrophy, migration, and elevated extracellular matrix (ECM) production elicited by mitogens and oxidants produced in response to hypoxic insult. We previously reported that the transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) is depleted in medial PA SMCs in remodeled, hypertensive vessels in rats or calves exposed to chronic hypoxia. In culture, CREB loss can be induced in PA SMCs by exogenous oxidants or platelet-derived growth factor. Forced depletion of CREB with small interfering RNA (siRNA) in PA SMCs is sufficient to induce their proliferation, hypertrophy, migration, dedifferentiation, and ECM production. This suggests that oxidant and/or mitogen-induced loss of CREB in medial SMCs is, in part, responsible for PA thickening. Here, we tested whether oxidant scavengers could prevent the loss of CREB in PA SMCs and inhibit SMC proliferation, migration, and ECM production using in vitro and in vivo models. Exposure of PA SMCs to hypoxia induced hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) production and loss of CREB. Treatment of SMCs with exogenous H2O2 or a second oxidant, Sin-1, elicited CREB depletion under normoxic conditions. Exogenous H2O2 also induced SMC proliferation, migration, and increased elastin levels as did forced depletion of CREB. In vivo, hypoxia-induced thickening of the PA wall was suppressed by the superoxide dismutase mimetic, Tempol, which also prevented the loss of CREB in medial SMCs. Tempol also reduced hypoxia-induced SMC proliferation and elastin deposition in the PA. The data indicate that CREB levels in the arterial wall are regulated in part by oxidants produced in response to hypoxia and that CREB plays a crucial role in regulating SMC phenotype and PA remodeling.<newchar><newabs>14667840<newchar>A tissue growth and development process occurred in neonatal SMC-fibrin gel constructs when cultured in DMEM supplemented with TGF-beta1 and insulin over a 5 week period. These constructs may thus serve as the basis for cardiovascular tissue replacements and future models of cardiovascular tissue growth, repair and regeneration. Following fibrin gel contraction during week 1, peak rates of SMC proliferation, collagen production and tropoelastin production occurred between weeks 1-4. Organized, cross-linked collagen and elastic fibers replaced the degrading fibrin over weeks 3-5 and were manifested as increased mechanical strength. The peak rate of SMC proliferation (weeks 1-2) preceded that for maximum collagen production (weeks 2-4), which was consistent with the 3 week time point of maximum expression of collagen type I and III from qRT-PCR. Insoluble elastin quantification revealed that the majority of elastic fibers were produced by week 4, which was also consistent with the qRT-PCR data showing a dramatic down-regulation of tropoelastin expression by week 4, indicating elastogenesis occurred during the early stages of tissue growth and development. There was a strong up-regulation of lysyl oxidase expression during weeks 1-3 with a peak in expression at week 3, correlating with the phases of collagen and tropoelastin production. An increase in MMP-2 expression over weeks 1-5 suggested an increase in ECM remodeling as the tissue developed. Mechanical strength doubled over weeks 4-5 when production of collagen and elastic fibers and expression of lysyl oxidase were subsiding. This may have been due in part to the more organized collagen fibrils evident from the histological sections in weeks 3-5.<newchar><newabs>25258703<newchar>As part of a program to assess the adverse biological effects expected from astronaut exposure to space radiation, numerous different biological effects relating to astronaut health have been evaluated. There has been major focus recently on the assessment of risks related to exposure to solar particle event (SPE) radiation. The effects related to various types of space radiation exposure that have been evaluated are: gene expression changes (primarily associated with programmed cell death and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling), oxidative stress, gastrointestinal tract bacterial translocation and immune system activation, peripheral hematopoietic cell counts, emesis, blood coagulation, skin, behavior/fatigue (including social exploration, submaximal exercise treadmill and spontaneous locomotor activity), heart functions, alterations in biological endpoints related to astronaut vision problems (lumbar puncture/intracranial pressure, ocular ultrasound and histopathology studies), and survival, as well as long-term effects such as cancer and cataract development. A number of different countermeasures have been identified that can potentially mitigate or prevent the adverse biological effects resulting from exposure to space radiation.<newchar><newabs>25441775<newchar>Integrins are a group of transmembrane heterodimeric proteins that mediate cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. Integrins have been under intense investigation for their role in inflammation in asthma. Clinical trials investigating integrin antagonists, however, have shown that these compounds are relatively ineffective. Airway remodelling is another pathological feature of asthma that is thought to make an important contribution to airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and lung function decline. Recent studies have identified integrins as important players in this process, with a particular role for β1 and αv integrins. Here we review the role of these integrins in airway remodelling and hyperresponsiveness in obstructive airway disease and their potential as pharmacological targets for future treatment.<newchar>airway fibroblast<n-term>airway hyperresponsiveness<n-term>airway remodelling<n-term>airway smooth muscle<n-term>integrin<n-term><newabs>21361746<newchar>Peripheral compartment syndrome (PCS) has a complex etiology, with limited treatment options and high patient morbidity. Animal models of PCS have been hampered by differences in cross-species anatomy, physiology, and the relative rarity of the naturally occurring syndrome in animals. In the present study, the combination of saline infusion with intermittent crushing of skeletal muscle consistently caused increased intracompartmental pressure, hypocalemia, and hypercreatinine-phophokinasemia, signs diagnostic of PCS. This method was used to evaluate both the standard PCS treatment, specifically a fasciotomy, and a regenerative medicine approach for treatment-consisting of a fasciotomy with local administration of a biologic scaffold material composed of porcine small intestinal submucosa extracellular matrix (SIS-ECM). The use of this SIS-ECM scaffold in conjunction with a fasciotomy was associated with myogenesis and constructive tissue remodeling in the SIS-ECM-treated animals. At 1 and 3 months after treatment innervated muscle tissue was present at the site of injury. No myogenesis was present in the fasciotomy only treated animals. RAM11+ macrophages, which are associated with constructive tissue remodeling, were present within the injury site in the SIS-ECM-treated animals at 1 month. The present study provides a reproducible animal model with which to study PCS, and shows the potential of a regenerative medicine approach to PCS treatment.<newchar><newabs>14531787<newchar>The progression of renal scarring and the associated loss of function remains one of the main challenges in nephrology. Until recently, the glomerular and tubulointerstitial scarring processes were thought to involve primarily interactions between infiltrating inflammatory cells and resident renal cells culminating in loss of renal cells and their replacement by extracellular collagenous matrix (ECM). This review focuses on new aspects of renal response to injury and remodeling. Emphasis is on the plasticity of renal cells with the capacity of both glomerular and tubular cells to assume a range of phenotypes during the remodeling process. Both glomerular and tubular epithelial cells regress to primitive/embryonic mesenchymal phenotype in response to injury. This reverse embryogenesis is a key step in renal healing and scarring. In addition to the plasticity of intrinsic renal cells, it is becoming apparent that renal remodeling in health and disease involves the migration of progenitor hematopoietic stem cells into the kidneys. These cells assume various glomerular and tubular epithelial phenotype. They are also involved in the evolution of lesions toward healing or scarring. A better understanding of some of these key events in renal remodeling and their mediators may open the way to new interventions based on their manipulations and aimed at favoring renal healing and preventing scarring.<newchar><newabs>23493612<newchar>Images of tumor mechanical properties provide important insights into malignant-cell processes manifest by extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffening and remodeling. This article presents a pilot study measuring in vivo mechanical-property characteristics of rodent mammary tumors using an ultrasonic shear-wave imaging technique. Shear waves are generated by a needle inserted into the tumor of anesthetized rodents that is vibrated harmonically between 50 and 450 Hz. Particle motion in the tumor associated with the radiation of cylindrical shear waves is imaged using pulsed-Doppler ultrasound techniques. Estimating the spatial gradient of shear-wave phase along the direction of propagation at frequencies in the measurement range yields shear-speed dispersion curves. Measured dispersion curves were fit to those predicted by three different rheological models to estimate the elastic and viscous coefficients of the complex shear modulus. The investigation was performed in vivo on four rat-mammary fibroadenoma tumors and five xenograft mouse-mammary carcinoma tumors. Each tumor was subsequently excised for histological imaging and composition analysis. Collagen composition was measured using hydroxyproline assays that were then correlated with mechanical measurements. The goal was to relate soft-tissue mechanical behavior to biological characteristics of tumor structures, specifically the collagenous ECM protein content. The choice of rheological model and the effects of artifacts induced by shear-wave reflections at internal tissue boundaries are carefully examined in this article. Addressing these issues is of great importance when selecting force-excitation methods and modulus estimation method to assess intrinsic tissue properties responsible for disease-specific elastographic contrast.<newchar><newabs>14739764<newchar>Short-term survival following a myocardial infarction (MI) has greatly improved, due in part to therapeutic interventions that restore blood flow and limit infarct size. The increased incidence of infarct-stimulated left ventricular (LV) remodeling that advances to congestive heart failure (CHF), however, is a significant long-term complication and a leading cause of mortality. Changes to ECM structure and function are primary components of LV remodeling and are precipitated by the early increase in infarct area collagen levels that replace necrotic myocytes and form a scar. ECM turnover is coordinated through the synthesis and degradation of ECM and non-ECM components, particularly the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), a family of proteolytic enzymes that cleave ECM. MMPs have multiple roles in remodeling events that lead to LV dilation. The inhibition or targeted deletion of specific MMPs attenuates LV remodeling events post-MI. MMP inhibitors have been used in animal models to delineate LV remodeling mechanisms and to evaluate the pharmacologic potential of targeting the ECM to modify LV remodeling post-MI. This review summarizes the current knowledge and limitations of MMP inhibition in the post-MI myocardium.<newchar><newabs>24801032<newchar>Carcinomas are constituted by malignant epithelial cells and the tumor microenvironment also called tumoral stroma. The present non-exhaustive review will focus on cellular and molecular key events implicating cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) and the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the stroma remodeling processes occuring during tumor invasive steps. We will also discuss the place of the stroma in the cancerology today, the recent progresses done and its usefulness to design new therapies.<newchar><newabs>23329175<newchar>Cell invasion through the extracellular matrix (ECM) of connective tissue is an important biomechanical process, which plays a prominent role in tumor progression. The malignancy of tumors depends mainly on the capacity of cancer cells to migrate and metastasize. A prerequisite for metastasis is the invasion of cancer cells through connective tissue to targeted organs. Cellular stiffness and cytoskeletal remodeling dynamics have been proposed to affect the invasiveness of cancer cells. Here, this study investigated whether highly invasive cancer cells are capable of invading into dense 3D-ECMs with an average pore-size of 1.3 or 3.0 μm when phagocytized beads (2.7 and 4.5 μm diameter) increased their cellular stiffness and reduced their cytoskeletal remodeling dynamics compared to weakly invasive cancer cells. The phagocytized beads decreased the invasiveness of the α5β1(high) cancer cells into 3D-ECMs, whereas the invasiveness of the α5β1(low) cancer cells was not affected. The effect of phagocytized beads on the highly invasive α5β1(high) cells was abolished by specific knock-down of the α5 integrin subunit or addition of an anti-α5 integrin blocking antibody. Furthermore, the reduction of contractile forces using MLCK and ROCK inhibitors abolished the effect of phagocytized beads on the invasiveness of α5β1(high) cells. In addition, the cellular stiffness of α5β1(high) cells was increased after bead phagocytosis, whereas the bead phagocytosis did not alter the stiffness of α5β1(low) cells. Taken together, the α5β1 integrin dependent invasiveness was reduced after bead phagocytosis by altered biomechanical properties, suggesting that the α5β1(high) cells need an appropriate intermediate cellular stiffness to overcome the steric hindrance of 3D-ECMs, whereas the α5β1(low) cells were not affected by phagocytized beads.<newchar><newabs>24269848<newchar>Cell alignment plays a critical role in various cell behaviors including cytoskeleton reorganization, membrane protein relocation, nucleus gene expression, and ECM remodeling. Cell alignment is also known to exert significant effects on tissue regeneration (e.g., neuron) and modulate mechanical properties of tissues including skeleton, cardiac muscle and tendon. Therefore, it is essential to engineer cell alignment in vitro for biomechanics, cell biology, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications. With advances in nano- and micro-scale technologies, a variety of approaches have been developed to engineer cell alignment in vitro, including mechanical loading, topographical patterning, and surface chemical treatment. In this review, we first present alignments of various cell types and their functionality in different tissues in vivo including muscle and nerve tissues. Then, we provide an overview of recent approaches for engineering cell alignment in vitro. Finally, concluding remarks and perspectives are addressed for future improvement of engineering cell alignment.<newchar>Cell alignment<n-term>Mechanical loading<n-term>Surface chemical treatment<n-term>Tissue engineering<n-term>Topographical patterning<n-term><newabs>24411676<newchar>Mechanical stimulation plays an important role in the development and remodeling of tendons. Tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) are an attractive cell source for tendon injury and tendon tissue engineering. However, these cells have not yet been fully explored for tendon tissue engineering application, and there is also lack of understanding to the effect of mechanical stimulation on the maturation of TDSCs-scaffold construct for tendon tissue engineering. In this study, we assessed the efficacy of TDSCs in a poly(L-lactide-co-ε-caprolactone)/collagen (P(LLA-CL)/Col) scaffold under mechanical stimulation for tendon tissue engineering both in vitro and in vivo, and evaluated the utility of the transplanted TDSCs-scaffold construct to promote rabbit patellar tendon defect regeneration. TDSCs displayed good proliferation and positive expressed tendon-related extracellular matrix (ECM) genes and proteins under mechanical stimulation in vitro. After implanting into the nude mice, the fluorescence imaging indicated that TDSCs had long-term survival, and the macroscopic evaluation, histology and immunohistochemistry examinations showed high-quality neo-tendon formation under mechanical stimulation in vivo. Furthermore, the histology, immunohistochemistry, collagen content assay and biomechanical testing data indicated that dynamically cultured TDSCs-scaffold construct could significantly contributed to tendon regeneration in a rabbit patellar tendon window defect model. TDSCs have significant potential to be used as seeded cells in the development of tissue-engineered tendons, which can be successfully fabricated through seeding of TDSCs in a P(LLA-CL)/Col scaffold followed by mechanical stimulation.<newchar>Mechanical stimulation<n-term>Poly(L-lactide-co-ε-caprolactone)/collagen<n-term>Scaffold<n-term>Tendon stem cells<n-term>Tissue engineering<n-term><newabs>22415307<newchar>During forelimb regeneration in the newt Notophthalmus viridescens, the dynamic expression of a transitional matrix rich in hyaluronic acid, tenascin-C, and fibronectin controls muscle cell behavior in vivo and in vitro. However, the influence of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling on tissue stiffness and the cellular response to mechanical variations during regeneration was unknown. By measuring the transverse stiffness of tissues in situ, we found undifferentiated regenerative blastemas were less stiff than differentiated stump muscle (13.3±1.6 vs. 16.6±1.2 kPa). To directly determine how ECM and stiffness combine to affect skeletal muscle fragmentation, migration, and fusion, we coated silicone-based substrates ranging from 2 to 100 kPa with matrices representative of transitional (tenascin-C and fibronectin) and differentiated environments (laminin and Matrigel). Using live-cell imaging, we found softer tenascin-C-coated substrates significantly enhanced migration and fragmentation of primary newt muscle cells. In contrast, stiffer substrates coated with laminin, Matrigel, or fibronectin increased differentiation while suppressing migration and fragmentation. These data support our in vivo observations that a transitional matrix of reduced stiffness regulates muscle plasticity and progenitor cell recruitment into the regenerative blastema. These new findings will enable the determination of how biochemical and mechanical cues from the ECM control genetic pathways that drive regeneration.<newchar><newabs>18837648<newchar>The chemotactic properties of a biologic scaffold composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) and subjected to in vivo degradation and remodeling were evaluated in a mouse model of Achilles tendon reconstruction. Following a segmental resection of the Achilles tendon in both C57BL/6 and MRL/MpJ mice, the defect was repaired with either an ECM scaffold composed of urinary bladder matrix (UBM) or resected autologous tendon. The surgically repaired and the contralateral tendons were harvested at 3, 7, and 14 days following surgery from each animal. Chemotaxis of multipotential progenitor cells toward the harvested tissue was quantified using a fluorescent-based cell migration assay. Results showed greater migration of progenitor cells toward tendons repaired with UBM-ECM scaffold compared to both the tendons repaired with autologous tissue and the normal contralateral tendon in both the MRL/MpJ and C57BL/6 mice. The magnitude and temporal pattern of the chemotactic response differed between the two mouse strains.<newchar><newabs>12555139<newchar>The myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) surrounds and interconnects cardiac myocytes, myofibrils, muscle fibers, and the coronary microcirculation. Because of the high tensile strength of fibrillar collagen and its close association with the functioning components of the myocardium, alterations in interstitial collagen can significantly influence the size and shape of the cardiac chambers as well as ventricular function. Typically, an increase in interstitial collagen concentration secondary to pressure overload results in both the myocardium and the ventricle becoming stiffer. In contrast, a reduction in collagen concentration characterized by a disruption and disappearance of fibrillar collagen leads to a markedly dilated left ventricle that is significantly more compliant. However, the effects of myocardial ECM alterations on systolic function remain to be determined. This article provides a brief summary of the structural and functional consequences of alterations to the myocardial ECM and discusses gaps in our knowledge and future research directions.<newchar><newabs>18790992<newchar>Irreversible airflow limitation in asthma is associated with airway remodeling in which the differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts plays a pivotal role. In asthmatic airways, excessive production of reactive nitrogen species (RNS) has been observed. The aim of this study is to evaluate whether peroxynitrite, one of the RNS, can affect the differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. Human fetal lung fibroblasts were treated with various concentrations of authentic peroxynitrite or a peroxynitrite donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine hydrochloride (SIN-1), and the expressions of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) and desmin, markers of myofibroblast differentiation, were evaluated. The releases of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) and ECM proteins including fibronectin and collagen I were assessed. To clarify the mechanism in this differentiation, the effect of anti-TGF-beta antibody or NF-kappaB inhibitors on the alpha-SMA expression and ECM production was assessed. Peroxynitrite and SIN-1 significantly augmented the alpha-SMA expression compared with control in a concentration-dependent manner (P &lt; 0.01 and P &lt; 0.05, respectively). Peroxynitrite significantly increased desmin and TGF-beta(1) production (P &lt; 0.01). Peroxynitrite enhanced the translocation of NF-kappaB into the nucleus confirmed by immunocytostaining and immunoblotting. Peroxynitrite-augmented alpha-SMA expression was blocked by NF-kappaB inhibitors, MG132 and caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), and anti-TGF-beta antibody. CAPE completely inhibited the peroxynitrite-augmented TGF-beta(1) release. The production of fibronectin and collagen I was significantly increased by peroxynitrite (P &lt; 0.01) and inhibited by anti-TGF-beta antibody. These results suggest that RNS can affect the differentiation to myofibroblasts and excessive ECM production via a NF-kappaB-TGF-beta(1)-dependent pathway.<newchar><newabs>25707263<newchar>The review considers molecular mechanisms of chronic renal failure and cancer kidney disease. The most important molecules inducing inflammation are cytokines (MCP-1, TNFalpha, IFN-gamma, IL-1,6,8,18), matrix metalloproteinases MMP-2,3,9,14, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and grow factors (VEGF PDGE FGF). This signal molecules regulate the activity of immune cells and remodeling extracellular matrix (ECM) components taken place in inflammatory reactions, proliferation, apoptosis and also in the differentiation of kidney cells. On the basis of these data nowadays developed new highly selective approaches to diagnosis, prediction, estimation of efficiency of treatment of renal disease and creating of target drugs.<newchar><newabs>10949582<newchar>Female reproductive tissues possess a unique ability to accommodate a remarkable amount of cell turnover and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling following puberty. Cellular structures within ovary, uterus, and mammary tissue not only change cyclically in response to ovarian hormones but also undergo differentiation during pregnancy, and eventually revert to that resembling the pre-pregnant stage. Cell proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, and differentiation are integral cellular processes that are precisely regulated in reproductive tissues, but become dysregulated in pathologies such as cancer. Explicit reorganization of ECM and basement membranes is also critical to preserve the form and function of these tissues. Here we review the evidence that coordinated spatiotemporal expression patterns of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) genes and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) are important in cell and ECM turnover of the ovary, uterus, and mammary tissues. We discuss how perturbation in these gene families may impact the biology of these reproductive tissues and the factors implicated in the control of MMP and TIMP gene expression. The observed trends in MMP and TIMP expression involved in ovarian and mammary carcinomas are also presented.<newchar><newabs>24580919<newchar>Surgical repair of tricuspid regurgitation after medical management of infective endocarditis can present a challenging scenario. We present the case of a 53-year-old man in whom a conventional tricuspid valve operation was deemed suboptimal. Instead, we used a commercially available extracellular matrix (ECM) to perform an extensive reconstruction of his tricuspid valve. Follow-up shows dramatic symptomatic resolution and reverse remodeling of his dilated right ventricle.<newchar><newabs>18688033<newchar>Thrombospondin 2 (TSP2) can inhibit angiogenesis in vitro by limiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis of endothelial cells (ECs). TSP2 can also modulate the extracellular levels of gelatinases (matrix metalloproteases, MMPs) and potentially influence the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we tested the hypothesis that by regulating MMPs, TSP2 could alter EC-ECM interactions. By using a three-dimensional angiogenesis assay, we show that TSP2, but not TSP1, limited angiogenesis by decreasing gelatinolytic activity in situ. Furthermore, TSP2-null fibroblast-derived ECM, which contains irregular collagen fibrils, was more permissive for EC migration. Investigation of the role of TSP2 in physiological angiogenesis in vivo, using excision of the left femoral artery in both TSP2-null and wild-type mice, revealed that TSP2-null mice displayed accelerated recovery of blood flow. This increase was attributable, in part, to an enhanced arterial network in TSP2-null muscles of the upper limb. Angiogenesis in the lower limb was also increased and was associated with increased MMP-9 deposition and gelatinolytic activity. The observed changes correlated with the temporal expression of TSP2 in the ischemic muscle of wild-type mice. Taken together, our observations implicate the matrix-modulating activity of TSP2 as a mechanism by which physiological angiogenesis is inhibited.<newchar><newabs>10427102<newchar>Cell spreading and migration associated with the expression of the 92-kD gelatinase (matrix metalloproteinase 9 or MMP-9) are important mechanisms involved in the repair of the respiratory epithelium. We investigated the location of MMP-9 and its potential role in migrating human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC). In vivo and in vitro, MMP-9 accumulated in migrating HBEC located at the leading edge of a wound and MMP-9 expression paralleled cell migration speed. MMP-9 accumulated through an actin-dependent pathway in the advancing lamellipodia of migrating cells and was subsequently found active in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Lamellipodia became anchored through primordial contacts established with type IV collagen. MMP-9 became amassed behind collagen IV where there were fewer cell-ECM contacts. Both collagen IV and MMP-9 were involved in cell migration because when cell-collagen IV interaction was blocked, cells spread slightly but did not migrate; and when MMP-9 activation was prevented, cells remained fixed on primordial contacts and did not advance at all. These observations suggest that MMP-9 controls the migration of repairing HBEC by remodeling the provisional ECM implicated in primordial contacts.<newchar><newabs>22009724<newchar>Pituitary tumorigenesis involves remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Heparanase, an endoglycosidase capable of degrading heparan sulfate, a major polysaccharide constituent of the ECM, is implicated in diverse processes associated with ECM remodeling, such as morphogenesis, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible role of heparanase in pituitary tumorigenesis. Human normal pituitaries and pituitary tumors were examined for heparanase mRNA and protein expression using real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Cell proliferation was assessed by colony formation after heparanase overexpression in GH3 and MtT/S cells. Cell viability and cell cycle progression were evaluated after heparanase gene silencing. Higher heparanase mRNA and protein expression was noted in GH tumors as compared with normal pituitaries. Heparanase overexpression in GH3 and MtT/S cells resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in colony number, compared with control cells. Cell viability decreased by 50% after heparanase gene silencing due to induced apoptosis reflected by increased fraction of cleaved poly-ADP-ribose polymerase and sub-G1 events. Notably, exogenously added heparanase enhanced epidermal growth factor receptor, Src, Akt, ERK, and p38 phosphorylation in pituitary tumor cells. Our results indicate that heparanase enhances pituitary cell viability and proliferation and may thus contribute to pituitary tumor development and progression.<newchar><newabs>19199218<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are crucial to the development and maintenance of healthy tissue and are mainly involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling of skeletal muscle. This study evaluated the effects of chronic allergic airway inflammation (CAAI), induced by ovalbumin, and aerobic training in the MMPs activity in mouse diaphragm muscle. Thirty mice were divided into 6 groups: 1) control; 2) ovalbumin; 3) treadmill trained at 50% of maximum speed; 4) ovalbumin and trained at 50%; 5) trained at 75%; 6) ovalbumin and trained at 75%. CAAI did not alter MMPs activities in diaphragm muscle. Nevertheless, both treadmill aerobic trainings, associated with CAAI increased the MMP-2 and -1 activities. Furthermore, MMP-9 was not detected in any group. Together, these findings suggest an ECM remodeling in diaphragm muscle of asthmatic mice submitted to physical training. This result may be useful for a better understanding of functional significance of changes in the MMPs activity in response to physical training in asthma.<newchar><newabs>21910939<newchar>Ligament healing of a grade III injury (i.e., a complete tear) involves a multifaceted chain of events that forms a neoligament, which is more scar-like in character than the native tissue. The remodeling process may last months or even years with the injured ligament never fully recovering pre-injury mechanical properties. With tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, understanding the normal healing process in ligament and quantifying it provide a basis to create and assess innovative treatments. Ligament fibroblasts produce a number of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, including collagen types I and III, decorin and fibromodulin. Using a combination of advanced histology, molecular biology, and nonlinear optical imaging approaches, the early ECM events during ligament healing have been better characterized and defined. First, the dynamic changes in ECM factors after injury are shown. Second, the factors associated with creeping substitution are identified. Finally, a method to quantify collagen organization is developed and used. Each ECM factor described herein as well as the temporal quantification of fiber organization helps elucidate the complexity of ligament healing.<newchar><newabs>24365513<newchar>Arterial aging is the major contributing factor to increases in the incidence and prevalence of cardiovascular disease, due mainly to the presence of chronic, low-grade, 'sterile' arterial inflammation. Inflammatory signaling driven by the angiotensin II cascade perpetrates adverse age-associated arterial structural and functional remodeling. The aged artery is characterized by endothelial disruption, enhanced vascular smooth muscle cell (VMSC) migration and proliferation, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, elastin fracture, and matrix calcification/amyloidosis/glycation. Importantly, the molecular mechanisms of arterial aging are also relevant to the pathogenesis of hypertension and atherosclerosis. Age-associated arterial proinflammation is to some extent mutable, and interventions to suppress or delay it may have the potential to ameliorate or retard age-associated arterial diseases.<newchar>angiotensin II<n-term>atherosclerosis<n-term>central arterial aging<n-term>hypertension<n-term>proinflammation<n-term><newabs>14730222<newchar>When we previously examined the participation of local expression of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) in wound healing of an intestinal anastomosis under septic conditions in mice, we found that IL-10 and TNFalpha expressions were markedly enhanced around the anastomosis and that wound healing was impaired in this animal model. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the combined effect of IL-10 on proliferation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of cultured human skin fibroblasts. Human skin fibroblasts were cultured for 48 h with IL-10 and/or TNFalpha at various concentrations, then the proliferation rates were determined using the MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay. The concentration of transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGFbeta1) in cell culture supernatants was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and type I collagen protein and matrix metalloproteinase-I (MMP-I) were detected by indirect immunofluorescence in cultured cells incubated for 48 h with 10 ng/ml of IL-10 and/or 10 ng/ml of TNFalpha. IL-10 itself had no effect on fibroblast proliferation, but reduced TNFalpha-induced fibroblast proliferation. The concentration of TGFbeta1 in cell culture supernatants was significantly lower in the presence of TNFalpha and IL-10 than in the presence of TNFalpha alone. Immunolabeling of fibroblasts for type I collagen protein was decreased in cells incubated with IL-10 and/or TNFalpha compared to controls. MMP-I immunolabeling was increased in cells incubated with IL-10, IL-10 and TNFalpha compared to control and cells incubated with TNFalpha. It is suggested that IL-10 is an inhibitory factor for the remodeling of the ECM during wound healing.<newchar><newabs>20822891<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a key regulator of cell and tissue function. Traditionally, the ECM has been thought of primarily as a physical scaffold that binds cells and tissues together. However, the ECM also elicits biochemical and biophysical signaling. Controlled proteolysis and remodeling of the ECM network regulate tissue tension, generate pathways for migration, and release ECM protein fragments to direct normal developmental processes such as branching morphogenesis. Collagens are major components of the ECM of which basement membrane type IV and interstitial matrix type I are the most prevalent. Here we discuss how abnormal expression, proteolysis and structure of these collagens influence cellular functions to elicit multiple effects on tumors, including proliferation, initiation, invasion, metastasis, and therapy response.<newchar><newabs>17678629<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteolytic enzymes that degrade various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Members of the MMP family include collagenases, gelatinases, stromelysins, matrilysins and membrane-type MMPs. ProMMPs are cleaved into active forms that promote degradation of ECM proteins. Also, recent evidence suggests direct or indirect effects of MMPs on ion channels in the endothelium and vascular smooth muscle, and on other mechanisms of vascular relaxation/contraction. Endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) reduce excessive proteolytic ECM degradation by MMPs. The balance between MMPs and TIMPs plays a major role in vascular remodeling, angiogenesis, and the uterine and systemic vasodilation during normal pregnancy. An imbalance in the MMPs/TIMPs activity ratio may underlie the pathogenesis of vascular diseases such as abdominal aortic aneurysm, varicose veins, hypertension and preeclampsia. Downregulation of MMPs using genetic manipulations of endogenous TIMPs, or synthetic pharmacological inhibitors such as BB-94 (Batimastat) and doxycycline, and Ro-28-2653, a more specific inhibitor of gelatinases and membrane type 1-MMP, could be beneficial in reducing the MMP-mediated vascular dysfunction and the progressive vessel wall damage associated with vascular disease.<newchar><newabs>12172915<newchar>Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1 disease (CMT1) is a group of inherited demyelinating neuropathies caused by mutations in genes expressed by myelinating Schwann cells. Rather than demyelination per se, alterations of Schwann cell-axon interactions have been suggested as the main cause of motor-sensory impairment in CMT1 patients. In an attempt to identify molecules that may be involved in such altered interactions, the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling occurring in CMT1 sural nerves was studied. For comparison, both normal sural nerves and sural nerves affected by neuropathies of different origin were used. The study was performed by immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies against collagen types I, III, IV, V, and VI and the glycoproteins fibronectin, laminin, vitronectin and tenascin. Up-regulation of collagens, fibronectin and laminin was commonly found in nerve biopsy specimens from patients affected by CMT1 and control diseases, but higher levels of overexpression were usually observed in CMT1 cases. On the other hand, vitronectin and tenascin appeared preferentially induced in CMT1 compared to other pathologies investigated here. Vitronectin, whose expression in normal nerves was limited to perineurial layers and to the walls of epineurial and endoneurial vessels, became strongly and diffusely expressed in the endoneurium in most CMT1 biopsy specimens. The expression of tenascin, confined to the perineurium, to vessel walls and to the nodes of Ranvier in normal nerves, was displaced and extended along the internodes of several nerve fibers in the majority of CMT1 nerves. Thus, compared with our pathological controls CMT1 seemed to determine the most extensive remodeling of peripheral nerve ECM.<newchar><newabs>17325694<newchar>Both structural and inflammatory cells are capable of secreting transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta and expressing TGF-beta receptors. TGF-beta can induce multiple cellular responses including differentiation, apoptosis, survival and proliferation, and has been implicated in the development of several pathogenic conditions including cancer and asthma. Elevated levels of TGF-beta have been reported in the asthmatic airway. TGF-beta binds to its receptor complex and activates multiple pathways involving proteins such as Sma and Mad homologues, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and the mitogen-activated protein kinases, leading to the transcription of several genes. Cell type, cellular condition, and microenvironment, all play a role in determining which pathway is activated, which, in turn, is an indication of which gene is to be transcribed. TGF-beta has been shown to induce apoptosis in airway epithelial cells. A possible role for TGF-beta in the regulation of epithelial cell adhesion properties has also been reported. Enhancement of goblet cell proliferation by TGF-beta suggests a role in mucus hyper-secretion. Elevated levels of TGF-beta correlate with subepithelial fibrosis. TGF-beta induces proliferation of fibroblast cells and their differentiation into myofibroblasts and extracellular matrix (ECM) protein synthesis during the development of subepithelial fibrosis. TGF-beta also induces proliferation and survival of and ECM secretion in airway smooth muscle cells (ASMCs), suggesting a possible cause of increased thickness of airway tissues. TGF-beta also induces the production and release of vascular endothelial cell growth factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor, contributing to the vascular remodeling in the asthmatic airway. Blocking TGF-beta activity inhibits epithelial shedding, mucus hyper-secretion, angiogenesis, ASMC hypertrophy and hyperplasia in an asthmatic mouse model. Reduction of TGF-beta production and control of TGF-beta effects would be beneficial in the development of therapeutic intervention for airway remodeling in chronic asthma.<newchar><newabs>17572164<newchar>The elucidation of molecular cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions regulating tissue dynamics necessitates straightforward model systems that can dissect the associated physiological complexity into a smaller number of distinct interactions. Here we employ a previously developed artificial ECM model system to study dynamic cell-matrix interactions involved in proteolytic three-dimensional (3-D) migration and matrix remodeling at the level of single cells. Quantitative time-lapse microscopy of primary human fibroblasts exposed to exogenous physiological matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors revealed that 3-D migration is dependent on cell seeding density and occurred via highly localized MMP- and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2-dependent processes. Stimulation of cells by tumor necrosis factor alpha led to a striking augmentation in fibroblast migration that was accompanied by induction of alphaVbeta3 integrin expression. In long-term cultures, extensive localized cellular matrix remodeling resulted in the morphogenesis of single cells into interconnected multicellular networks. Therefore, these tailor-made artificial ECMs can replicate complex 3-D cell-matrix interactions involved in tissue development and regeneration, an important step in the design of next-generation synthetic biomaterials for tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>14718744<newchar>Vascular remodeling, defined as lasting structural changes in the vessel wall in response to hemodynamic stimuli, plays a role in many (patho)physiological processes requiring cell migration and degradation of extracellular matrix(ECM). Matrix metalloproteinase(MMP) system can degrade most ECM components. Several lines of evidence support a role for MMP system components in the development and progression of atherosclerosis and restenosis after angioplasty. This review article focuses on the role of MMPs in vascular remodeling relevant to atherosclerosis and restenosis after angioplasty.<newchar><newabs>22357946<newchar>Planar cell polarity (PCP) describes the polarized orientation of cells within the plane of a tissue. Unlike epithelial PCP, the mechanisms underlying PCP signaling in migrating cells remain undefined. Here, the establishment of PCP must be coordinated with dynamic changes in cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM) organization. During gastrulation, the membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP or MMP14) is required for PCP and convergence and extension cell movements. We report that the PCP protein Vang-like 2 (VANGL2) regulates the endocytosis and cell-surface availability of MMP14 in manner that is dependent on focal adhesion kinase. We demonstrate that zebrafish trilobite/vangl2 mutant embryos exhibit increased Mmp14 activity and decreased ECM. Furthermore, in vivo knockdown of Mmp14 partially rescues the Vangl2 loss-of-function convergence and extension phenotype. This study identifies a mechanism linking VANGL2 with MMP14 trafficking and suggests that establishment of PCP in migrating gastrula cells requires regulated proteolytic degradation or remodeling of the ECM. Our findings implicate matrix metalloproteinases as downstream effectors of PCP and suggest a broadly applicable mechanism whereby VANGL2 affects diverse morphogenetic processes.<newchar><newabs>15276467<newchar>The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) play a pivotal role in the development of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Recent studies indicate that angiotensin II (Ang II) and TGF-beta1 do not act independently from one another but rather act as part of a signalling network in order to promote cardiac remodeling, which is a key determinant of clinical outcome in heart disease. This review focuses on recent advances in the understanding, how Ang II and TGF-beta1 are connected in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction. Increasing evidence suggests that at least some of the Ang II-induced effects on cardiac structure are mediated via indirect actions. Ang II upregulates TGF-beta1 expression via activation of the angiotensin type 1 (AT1) receptor in cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts, and induction of this cytokine is absolutely required for Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy in vivo. TGF-beta induces the proliferation of cardiac fibroblasts and their phenotypic conversion to myofibroblasts, the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as collagen, fibronectin, and proteoglycans, and hypertrophic growth of cardiomyocytes, and thereby mediates Ang II-induced structural remodeling of the ventricular wall in an auto-/paracrine manner. Downstream mediators of cardiac Ang II/TGF-beta1 networking include Smad proteins, TGFbeta-activated kinase-1 (TAK1), and induction of hypertrophic responsiveness to beta-adrenergic stimulation in cardiac myocytes.<newchar><newabs>19443026<newchar>Two-dimensional cell culture studies have shown that matrix rigidity can influence cell function, but little is known about how matrix physical properties, and their changes with time, influence cell function in 3-D. Biosynthetic hydrogels based on PEGylated fibrinogen permit the initial decoupling of matrix chemical and mechanical properties, and are thus potentially attractive for addressing this question. However, the mechanical stability of these gels due to passive hydrolysis and cell-mediated remodeling has not previously been addressed. Here, we show that the bulk mechanical properties of acellular PEG-fibrinogen hydrogels significantly decrease over time in PBS regardless of matrix cross-linking density in 7 days. To compensate, smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were encapsulated and stimulated to produce their own matrix using ascorbic acid or TGF-beta1. Ascorbic acid treatment improved the mechanical properties of the constructs after 14 days in less cross-linked matrices, but TGF-beta1 did not. The increase in matrix modulus of the constructs was not due to an increase in type I collagen deposition, which remained low and pericellular regardless of cross-link density or the soluble factor applied. Instead, ascorbic acid, but not TGF-beta1, preferentially enhanced the contractile SMC phenotype in the less cross-linked gels. Inhibition of contractility reduced cell spreading and the expression of contractile markers, and eliminated any beneficial increase in matrix modulus induced by cell-generated contraction of the gels. Together, these data show that PEG-fibrinogen hydrogels are susceptible to both hydrolysis and proteolysis, and suggest that some soluble factors may stimulate matrix remodeling by modulating SMC phenotype instead of inducing ECM synthesis in a 3-D matrix.<newchar><newabs>15265521<newchar>Epidermal remodeling is the concept that epidermal architecture is determined by a simple self-organizing mechanism; epidermal hyperproliferation constructs typical psoriatic architecture. This is based on the assumption that the enlargements in both the two-dimensional proliferative compartment (basal cell layer) and three-dimensional whole epidermal volume coexist. During this process, the dermal papillae become markedly, but passively, expanded by enlargement of the proliferative compartment. This creates a considerable shrinkage force against the crowded basal cell layer, which is forced to lose adherence to the dermal extracellular matrix (ECM). This results in anoikis, a type of apoptosis characterized by cell detachment, and, consequently, a markedly diminished epidermal turnover time in psoriasis. The papillary shrinkage force also explains the fact that dermal papillary height does not exceed a certain limit. At the cessation of hyperproliferation a normalisation remodeling takes place toward normal tissue architecture. Thus the concept of epidermal remodeling explains the self-organizing mechanism of the architectural change in psoriasis, which is essentially a reversible disorder depending on epidermal hyperproliferation.<newchar><newabs>17054936<newchar>Although the signaling molecules regulating the early stages of valvular development have been well described, little is known on the late steps leading to mature fibrous leaflets. We hypothesized that atrioventricular (AV) valve development continues after birth to adjust to the postnatal maturation of the heart. By doing a systematic analysis of the AV valves of mice from embryonic day (E) 15.5 to 8 weeks old, we identified key developmental steps that map the maturation process of embryonic cushion-like leaflets into adult stress-resistant valves. Condensation of the mesenchymal cells occurred between E15.5 and E18.5 and was accompanied by increased cellular proliferation and adhesion. Cellular proliferation also contributed transiently to the concomitant elongation of the leaflets. Patterning of the extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins along the AV axis was achieved 1 week after birth, with the differentiation of two reciprocal structural regions, glycosaminoglycans and versican at the atrial side, and densely packed collagen fibers at the ventricular side. Formation and remodeling of the nodular thickenings at the closure points of the leaflets occurred between N4.5 and N11.5. In conclusion, AV valve development during late embryonic and postnatal stages includes condensation, elongation, formation of nodular thickenings, and remodeling of tension-resistant ECM proteins.<newchar><newabs>11826121<newchar>Neurons of adult brain are able to remodel their synaptic connections in response to various stimuli. Modifications of the peridendritic environment, including the extracellular matrix, are likely to play a role during synapse remodeling. Proteolytic disassembly of ECM is a complex process using the regulated actions of specific extracellular proteinases. One of best-characterized families of matrix-modifying enzymes is the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family. Here, we describe changes in the expression and function of two well known MMPs, MMP-9 and MMP-2, in adult rat brain before and after systemic administration of the glutamate receptor agonist kainate. Kainate application results in enhanced synaptic transmission and seizures followed by selective tissue remodeling, primarily in hippocampal dentate gyrus. MMP-9 but not MMP-2 was highly expressed by neurons in normal adult rat brain. MMP-9 protein was localized in neuronal cell bodies and dendrites. Kainate upregulated the level of MMP-9 mRNA and protein within hours after drug administration. This was followed several hours later by MMP-9 enzymatic activation. Within hippocampus, MMP-9 mRNA and activity were increased selectively in dentate gyrus, including its dendritic layer. In addition, MMP-9 mRNA levels decreased in areas undergoing neuronal cell loss. This unique spatiotemporal pattern of MMP-9 expression suggests its involvement in activity-dependent remodeling of dendritic architecture with possible effects on synaptic physiology.<newchar><newabs>12769643<newchar>Remodeling of the myocardium is the major mechanism for disability and death in prevalent cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, heart failure and myocardial infarction (MI). It is a complex process that involves changes in structure, shape and topography at the global level and changes in myocytes and non-myocytes at cellular and subcellular levels that impact negatively on function. Although the myocytes subserve the heart's pump function, the predominant cell type in the heart is the fibroblast (not the myocyte). The fibroblast's major role is deposition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of which collagen is the principal component. The cardiac extracellular collagen matrix (ECCM) maintains structural and functional integrity, and contributes to coordinated mechanical action with every systole during life. Excessive collagen deposition or pathological fibrosis is an important contributor to left ventricular (LV) dysfunction and poor outcome in hypertension, MI and heart failure. It is also an important problem in the aging heart. Antifibrotic agents that target steps in the collagen synthesis and degradation pathways therefore represent promising strategies for these diseases. Because reparative fibrosis is an essential component of healing of the infarct zone (IZ) after MI, the design of approaches that separately target the IZ and non-infarct zone (NIZ) is challenging. It may be possible in future to target the collagen pathways in the heart or regions of the heart, and not other areas or organs, by delivering drugs or genes locally to specific regions.<newchar><newabs>12792752<newchar>It has been suggested that both extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and persistent hepatocyte injury play important roles in liver carcinogenesis process. It is, however, still controversial which factor plays a predominant role. The aim of the present study was to examine the role of each factor in the liver enzyme-altered preneoplastic lesions, focusing on the relationship between the hepatocyte injury and fibrosis extension. The effects of two similar herbal medicines (Sho-saiko-to and Saiko-keishi-to: TJ-9 and TJ-10, respectively) were elucidated on the hepatocyte injury, fibrosis and preneoplastic lesions development using a choline-deficient-L-amino acid-defined (CDAA) diet rat liver carcinogenesis model. TJ-9 prevented fibrosis and glutathione S-transferase placental form (GST-P)-positive preneoplastic lesion development without reducing the hepatocyte injury as indicated by the serum markers. TJ-10 significantly protected against the hepatocyte injury. However, it did not exert any inhibitory effect on fibrosis and the development of preneoplastic lesions. Our in vitro study revealed that TJ-9 markedly suppressed the hepatic stellate cell activation whereas TJ-10 did not. These results suggested that the ECM remodeling plays a more important role than the persistent hepatocyte injury in the liver enzyme-altered preneoplastic lesion development in the rat.<newchar><newabs>24938016<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are a family of zinc-containing endoproteinases that degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) components. MMP have important roles in the development, physiology and pathology of cardiovascular system. Metalloproteases also play key roles in adverse cardiovascular remodeling, atherosclerotic plaque formation and plaque instability, vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration and restenosis that lead to coronary artery disease (CAD), and progressive heart failure. The study of MMP in developing animal model cardiovascular systems has been helpful in deciphering numerous pathologic conditions in humans. Increased peripheral blood MMP-2 and MMP-9 in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) may be useful as noninvasive tests for detection of plaque vulnerability. MMP function can be modulated by certain pharmacological drugs that can be exploited for treatment of ACS. CAD is a polygenic disease and hundreds of genes contribute toward its predisposition. A large number of sequence variations in MMP genes have been identified. Case-control association studies have highlighted their potential association with CAD and its clinical manifestations. Although results thus far are inconsistent, meta-analysis has demonstrated that MMP-3 Glu45Lys and MMP-9 1562C/T gene polymorphisms were associated with CAD risk.<newchar><newabs>23281647<newchar>Cardiac aging is characterized by diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle (LV), which is due in part to increased LV wall stiffness. In the diastolic phase, myocytes are relaxed and extracellular matrix (ECM) is a critical determinant to the changes of LV wall stiffness. To evaluate the effects of ECM composition on cardiac aging, we developed a mathematical model to predict LV dimension and wall stiffness changes in aging mice by integrating mechanical laws and our experimental results. We measured LV dimension, wall thickness, LV mass, and collagen content for wild type (WT) C57/BL6J mice of ages ranging from 7.3 months to those of 34.0 months. The model was established using the thick wall theory and stretch-induced tissue growth to an isotropic and homogeneous elastic composite with mixed constituents. The initial conditions of the simulation were set based on the data from the young mice. Matlab simulations of this mathematical model demonstrated that the model captured the major features of LV remodeling with age and closely approximated experimental results. Specifically, the temporal progression of the LV interior and exterior dimensions demonstrated the same trend and order-of-magnitude change as our experimental results. In conclusion, we present here a validated mathematical model of cardiac aging that applies the thick-wall theory and stretch-induced tissue growth to LV remodeling with age.<newchar><newabs>20222960<newchar>Regulation of cellular functions during dermal repair following injury is complex and critically dependent on the interaction of cells with the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM comprises various families of macromolecules that form the structural scaffold of the tissue, but also carry distinct biological activities. After injury to the skin, the defect is filled by a provisional matrix that is invaded by inflammatory cells, sprouting blood vessels and fibroblasts. In a later phase, the wound contracts, the tissue is replaced by mature connective tissue produced by activated fibroblasts, and a scar is formed. All cells involved communicate directly with the ECM by integrins and other matrix receptors. These transmit signals and induce adaptive responses to the environment by the embedded cells. The ECM or proteolytic fragments of individual ECM constituents exert defined biological activities influencing cell survival, differentiation of myofibroblasts, ECM synthesis and turnover, wound angiogenesis and scar remodeling. Extensive crosstalk exists between ECM and growth factors, and between growth factors and integrins. ECM-cell contact also enables direct transmission of mechanical tension, which then modulates many activities of all cellular players. Understanding this complex interplay is important to provide a basis for designing effective wound therapy and for strategic interference with mechanisms that have gone out of control in fibrotic conditions.<newchar><newabs>25364719<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are secreted proteinases that have physiologic roles in degradation and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) in almost all tissues. However, their excessive production in disease conditions leads to many pathological features including tissue breakdown, inflammation, cell death, and fibrosis. Duchenne Muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a devastating genetic muscle disorder caused by partial or complete loss of cytoskeletal protein dystrophin. Progressive muscle wasting in DMD is accompanied by myofiber necrosis followed by cycles of regeneration and degeneration and inflammation that eventually result in replacement of myofiber by connective and adipose tissues. Emerging evidence suggests that gene expression and the activity of various MMPs are aberrantly regulated in muscle biopsies from DMD patients and in skeletal muscle of animal models of DMD. Moreover, a few studies employing genetic mouse models have revealed that different MMPs play distinct roles in disease progression in DMD. Modulation of the activity of MMPs improves myofiber regeneration and enhances the efficacy of transplantation and engraftment of muscle progenitor cells in dystrophic muscle in mouse models of DMD. Furthermore, recent reports also suggest that some MMPs especially MMP-9 can serve as a biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis of DMD. In this article, we provide a succinct overview of the regulation of various MMPs and their therapeutic importance in DMD.<newchar>NF-κB<n-term>TIMPs<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>inflammation<n-term>macrophages<n-term>matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>skeletal muscle<n-term><newabs>23426189<newchar>Hyaluronan (HA), a principal constituent of the extracellular matrix (ECM), mediates growth and metastasis of tumor cells. The role of HA in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is well known, and increased ECM remodeling is observed in mesenchymal-like cells. The HA synthesis inhibitor 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) is anti-tumorigenic for various malignant tumors. However, the antitumor effect of 4-MU against canine mammary tumor cells that possess a mesenchymal-like phenotype is unclear. We examined the antitumor effect of 4-MU on CF41.Mg mesenchymal-like canine mammary tumor cells. We investigated the influence of 4-MU on the expression of HA synthase (HAS) 1-3 mRNA and observed dose-dependent downregulation of HAS2 mRNA at 24-72 h; in contrast, HAS3 expression was elevated at 24 h. Thus, 4-MU inhibited HA synthesis via HAS2 repression. 4-MU also inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in the CF41.Mg cells. Our experiments showed that 4-MU-induced apoptosis in CF41.Mg cells involved induction of the pro-apoptotic gene BAX. We also assessed motility and found that 4-MU reduced chemokinesis and chemotaxis in CF41.Mg cells. Our data suggest that 4-MU may serve as a candidate therapeutic agent for the treatment of canine mammary tumors. Since 4-MU exhibits antitumor activity in mesenchymal-like cells, it may also be a useful inhibitor of canine mammary tumor invasion and metastasis.<newchar>4-methylumbelliferone<n-term>apoptosis<n-term>canine mammary tumor<n-term>chemokinesis<n-term>chemotaxis<n-term>hyaluronan<n-term>hyaluronan synthase<n-term><newabs>24240552<newchar>Hypertension is a known risk factor for aortic stenosis. The elevated blood pressure increases the transvalvular load and can elicit inflammation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Elevated cyclic pressure and the vasoactive agent angiotensin II (Ang II) both promote collagen synthesis, an early hallmark of aortic sclerosis. In the current study, it was hypothesized that elevated cyclic pressure and/or angiotensin II decreases extensibility of aortic valve leaflets due to an increase in collagen content and/or interstitial cell stiffness. Porcine aortic valve leaflets were exposed to pressure conditions of increasing magnitude (static atmospheric pressure, 80, and 120 mmHg) with and without 10−6 M Ang II. Biaxial mechanical testing was performed to determine extensibility in the circumferential and radial directions and collagen content was determined using a quantitative dye-binding method at 24 and 48 h. Isolated aortic valve interstitial cells exposed to the same experimental conditions were subjected to atomic force microscopy to assess cellular stiffness at 24 h. Leaflet tissue incubated with Ang II decreased tissue extensibility in the radial direction, but not in the circumferential direction. Elevated cyclic pressure decreased extensibility in both the radial and circumferential directions. Ang II and elevated cyclic pressure both increased the collagen content in leaflet tissue. Interstitial cells incubated with Ang II were stiffer than those incubated without Ang II while elevated cyclic pressure caused a decrease in cell stiffness. The results of the current study demonstrated that both pressure and Ang II play a role in altering the biomechanical properties of aortic valve leaflets. Ang II and elevated cyclic pressure decreased the extensibility of aortic valve leaflet tissue. Ang II induced direction specific changes in extensibility, demonstrating different response mechanisms. These findings help to provide a better understanding of the responses of aortic valves to mechanical and biochemical changes that occur under hypertensive conditions.<newchar><newabs>24741325<newchar>In this article, we have reviewed current literature regarding the regulation of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by the interaction of malignant hepatocytes and their tissue environment through cytokine signaling, here represented by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) signaling. We have discussed responses of TGF-β signaling in transition of hepatic stellate cells to myofibroblasts (MFBs), recruitment of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), and enrichment of tumor-associated endothelial cells (TECs). The malignant hepatocytes also secrete various factors such as platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and TGF-β. TGF-β, a super-family of cytokines, creates tumor microenvironment by interacting through other growth factors (epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), PDGF, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), VEGF), cytokines and chemokines, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Hence, the HCC tumor microenvironment may now be recognized as an important participant of tumor progression to act as potential target to systemic therapies compared to targeted therapies.<newchar>TGF-β<n-term>cancer stem cells<n-term>hepatocellular carcinoma<n-term>tumor microenvironment<n-term><newabs>25436884<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) represent a large family of over twenty different secreted or membrane-bound endopeptidases, involved in many physiological (embryogenesis, precursor or stem cell mobilization, tissue remodeling during wound healing, etc.), as well as pathological (inflammation, tumor progression and metastasis in cancer, vascular pathology, etc.) conditions. For a long time, MMPs were considered only for the ability to degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules (e.g., collagen, laminin, fibronectin) and to release hidden epitopes from the ECM. In the last few years, it has been fully elucidated that these molecules have many other functions, mainly related to the immune response, in consideration of their effects on cytokines, hormones and chemokines. Among others, MMP-2 and MMP-9 are endopeptidases of the MMP family produced by neutrophils, macrophages and monocytes. When infection is associated with leukocyte influx into specific organs, immunopathology and collateral tissue damage may occur. In this review, the involvement of MMPs and, in particular, of gelatinases in both protozoan and helminth infections will be described. In cerebral malaria, for example, MMPs play a role in the pathogenesis of such diseases. Also, trypanosomosis and toxoplasmosis will be considered for protozoan infections, as well as neurocysticercosis and angiostrongyloidosis, as regards helminthiases. All these situations have in common the proteolytic action on the blood brain barrier, mediated by MMPs.<newchar><newabs>22678997<newchar>Proteoglycans (PGs) are crucial extracellular matrix (ECM) components that are present in all tissues and organs. Pathological remodeling of these macromolecules can lead to severe diseases such as osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. To date, PG-associated ECM alterations are routinely diagnosed by invasive analytical methods. Here, we employed Raman microspectroscopy, a laser-based, marker-free and non-destructive technique that allows the generation of spectra with peaks originating from molecular vibrations within a sample, to identify specific Raman bands that can be assigned to PGs within human and porcine cartilage samples and chondrocytes. Based on the non-invasively acquired Raman spectra, we further revealed that a prolonged in vitro culture leads to phenotypic alterations of chondrocytes, resulting in a decreased PG synthesis rate and loss of lipid contents. Our results are the first to demonstrate the applicability of Raman microspectroscopy as an analytical and potential diagnostic tool for non-invasive cell and tissue state monitoring of cartilage in biomedical research.<newchar><newabs>24126863<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) is crucial in the cleavage and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), and its expression levels are decreased following the induction of liver fibrosis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in interleukin (IL)-1β-mediated MMP-13 gene expression in rat hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). In the present study, we demonstrated that IL-1β is capable of activating JNK and p38 in a time-dependent manner and the inhibition of the JNK pathway is able to increase MMP-13 mRNA expression; however, the inhibition of the p38 MAPK pathway is capable of inhibiting MMP-13 gene expression. These data demonstrate that IL-1β is able to promote MMP-13 mRNA expression in rat HSCs and the JNK and p38 MAPK pathways were involved in this process. In summary, IL-1β-induced MMP-13 mRNA expression is possibly mediated by cytoplasmic JNK and p38 MAPK pathways, and they play a distinct role in this process. Thus, the JNK and p38 MAPK pathway co-operatively mediate MMP-13 mRNA expression in rat HSCs.<newchar><newabs>21553156<newchar>Naturally-occurring biomaterial scaffolds derived from extracellular matrix (ECM) have been previously investigated for soft tissue repair. We propose to enrich fascia ECM with high molecular weight tyramine substituted-hyaluronan (TS-HA) to modulate inflammation associated with implantation and enhance fibroblast infiltration. As critical determinants of constructive remodeling, the host inflammatory response and macrophage polarization to TS-HA enriched fascia were characterized in a rat abdominal wall model. TS-HA treated fascia with cross-linking had a similar lymphocyte (P = 0.11) and plasma cell (P = 0.13) densities, greater macrophage (P = 0.001) and giant cell (P &lt; 0.0001) densities, and a lower density of fibroblast-like cells (P &lt; 0.0001) than water treated controls. Treated fascia, with or without cross-linking, exhibited a predominantly M2 pro-remodeling macrophage profile similar to water controls (P = 0.82), which is suggestive of constructive tissue remodeling. Our findings demonstrated that HA augmentation can alter the host response to an ECM, but the appropriate concentration and molecular weight needed to minimize chronic inflammation within the scaffold remains to be determined.<newchar><newabs>24105412<newchar>Adipose tissue (AT) expansion in obesity is characterized by cellular growth and continuous extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling with increased fibrillar collagen deposition. It is hypothesized that the matrix can inhibit cellular expansion and lipid storage. Therefore, it is important to fully characterize the ECM's biomechanical properties and its interactions with cells. In this study, we characterize and compare the mechanical properties of human subcutaneous and omental tissues, which have different physiological functions. AT was obtained from 44 subjects undergoing surgery. Force/extension and stress/relaxation data were obtained. The effects of osmotic challenge were measured to investigate the cellular contribution to tissue mechanics. Tissue structure and its response to tensile strain were determined using nonlinear microscopy. AT showed nonlinear stress/strain characteristics of up to a 30% strain. Comparing paired subcutaneous and omental samples (n = 19), the moduli were lower in subcutaneous: initial 1.6 ± 0.8 (means ± SD) and 2.9 ± 1.5 kPa (P = 0.001), final 11.7 ± 6.4 and 32 ± 15.6 kPa (P &lt; 0.001), respectively. The energy dissipation density was lower in subcutaneous AT (n = 13): 0.1 ± 0.1 and 0.3 ± 0.2 kPa, respectively (P = 0.006). Stress/relaxation followed a two-exponential time course. When the incubation medium was exchanged for deionized water in specimens held at 30% strain, force decreased by 31%, and the final modulus increased significantly. Nonlinear microscopy revealed collagen and elastin networks in close proximity to adipocytes and a larger-scale network of larger fiber bundles. There was considerable microscale heterogeneity in the response to strain in both cells and matrix fibers. These results suggest that subcutaneous AT has greater capacity for expansion and recovery from mechanical deformation than omental AT.<newchar>adipose<n-term>biomechanics<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term><newabs>24748747<newchar>The circulatory system is the first hierarchically ordered network to form during the development of vertebrates as it is an indispensable means of adequate oxygen and nutrient delivery to developing organs. During the initial phase of vascular development, endothelial lineage-committed cells differentiate, migrate, and coalesce to form the central large axial vessels and their branches. The subsequent phase of vessel expansion (i.e., angiogenesis) involves a cascade of events including endothelial cell migration, proliferation, formation of an immature capillary structure, recruitment of mural cells and deposition of a basement membrane to yield a functional vasculature. These series of events are tightly regulated by the coordinated expression of several angiogenic, morphogenic and guidance factors. The extracellular matrix (ECM) is synthesized and secreted by embryonic cells at the earliest stages of development and forms a pericellular network of bioactive stimulatory and inhibitory angiogenesis regulatory factors. Here we describe the role of a subset of inducible immediate-early gene-encoded, ECM-associated integrin- and heparin-binding proteins referred to as CCN1 (or Cyr61) and CCN2 (or CTGF) and their function in the development of the vascular system. Gene-targeting experiments in mice have identified CCN1 and CCN2 as critical rate-limiting determinants of endothelial cell differentiation and quiescence, mural cell recruitment and basement membrane formation during embryonic vascular development. Emphasis will be placed on the regulation and function of these molecules and their contextual mode of action during vascular development. Further understanding of the mechanisms of CCN1- and CCN2-mediated blood vessel expansion and remodeling would enhance the prospects that these molecules provide for the development of new treatments for vascular diseases.<newchar>CCN1<n-term>CCN2<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>blood vessels<n-term>development<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term><newabs>24210873<newchar>A quantitative understanding of the complex interactions between cells, soluble factors, and the biological and mechanical properties of biomaterials is required to guide cell remodeling toward regeneration of healthy tissue rather than fibrocontractive tissue. In the present study, we characterized the combined effects of boundary stiffness and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) on cell-generated forces and collagen accumulation. We first generated a quantitative map of cell-generated tension in response to these factors by culturing valvular interstitial cells (VICs) within micro-scale fibrin gels between compliant posts (0.15-1.05 nN/nm) in chemically-defined media with TGF-β1 (0-5 ng/mL). The VICs generated 100-3000 nN/cell after one week of culture, and multiple regression modeling demonstrated, for the first time, quantitative interaction (synergy) between these factors in a three-dimensional culture system. We then isolated passive and active components of tension within the micro-tissues and found that cells cultured with high levels of stiffness and TGF-β1 expressed myofibroblast markers and generated substantial residual tension in the matrix yet, surprisingly, were not able to generate additional tension in response to membrane depolarization signifying a state of continual maximal contraction. In contrast, negligible residual tension was stored in the low stiffness and TGF-β1 groups indicating a lower potential for shrinkage upon release. We then studied if ECM could be generated under the low tension environment and found that TGF-β1, but not EGF, increased de novo collagen accumulation in both low and high tension environments roughly equally. Combined, these findings suggest that isometric cell force, passive retraction, and collagen production can be tuned by independently altering boundary stiffness and TGF-β1 concentration. The ability to stimulate matrix production without inducing high active tension will aid in the development of robust tissue engineered heart valves and other connective tissue replacements where minimizing tissue shrinkage upon implantation is critical.<newchar>3D<n-term>Contraction<n-term>Heart valves<n-term>Stiffness<n-term>TGF-β1<n-term>Valvular interstitial cells<n-term><newabs>24551460<newchar>Matricellular proteins are secreted, nonstructural proteins that regulate the extracellular matrix (ECM) and interactions between cells through modulation of growth factor signaling, cell adhesion, migration, and proliferation. Despite being well described in the context of nonneuronal tissues, recent studies have revealed that these molecules may also play instrumental roles in central nervous system (CNS) development and diseases. In this minireview, we discuss the matricellular protein families SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine), Hevin/SC1 (SPARC-like 1), TN-C (Tenascin C), TSP (Thrombospondin), and CCN (CYR61/CTGF/NOV), which are secreted by astrocytes during development. These proteins exhibit a reduced expression in adult CNS but are upregulated in reactive astrocytes following injury or disease, where they are well placed to modulate the repair processes such as tissue remodeling, axon regeneration, glial scar formation, angiogenesis, and rewiring of neural circuitry. Conversely, their reexpression in reactive astrocytes may also lead to detrimental effects and promote the progression of neurodegenerative diseases.<newchar><newabs>24634571<newchar>The relationship between cancer progression and chronic inflammation is well documented but poorly understood. The innate immune system has long been recognized as the first line of defense against invading pathogens. More recently, endogenous molecules released from tissue matrix (Damage Associated Molecular Patterns [DAMPs]) following tissue injury or periods of active matrix remodeling have also been identified as regulators of innate immunity. DAMPs have been identified as ligands for Toll-like receptors (TLRs), a family of cell-surface proteins which regulate the immune response. TLRs have been identified on resident tissue cells as well as most tumor cells. Therefore, dysregulation of the innate immune response secondary to biochemical and mechanical driven changes in the extracellular matrix of the tumor microenvironment may be a critical component of the chronic inflammation associated with tumor progression. Here we review the role of extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived DAMPS in the activation of TLR4 signaling in the context of tumor progression. We also explore the various types of topographical changes that can lead to ECM-derived DAMPs and their contribution to TLR4 activation.<newchar>DAMP<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibronectin<n-term>toll-like receptor-4<n-term><newabs>23509775<newchar>Palatogenesis is directed by epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and results partly from remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the palatal shelves. Here, we assessed heparanase distribution in developing mouse palates. No heparanase was observed in the vertically oriented palatal shelves in early stages of palate formation. As palate formation progressed, the palatal shelves were reorganized and arranged horizontally above the tongue, and heparanase localized to the epithelial cells of these shelves. When the palatal bilateral shelves first made contact, the heparanase localized to epithelial cells at the tips of shelves. Later in fusing palatal shelves, the cells of the medial epithelial seam (MES) were labeled with intense heparanase signal. In contrast, the basement membrane heparan sulfate (HS) was scarcely observed in the palatal shelves in contact. Moreover, perlecan labeling was sparse in the basement membrane of the MES, on which laminin and type IV collagen were observed. Moreover, we assessed the distribution of matrix metalloproteinase- (MMP-) 9, MMP-2, and MMP-3 in developing mouse palates and these MMPs were observed in the MES. Our findings indicated that heparanase was important for palate formation because it mediated degradation of the ECM of palatal shelves. Heparanase may, in concert with other proteases, participate in the regression of the MES.<newchar><newabs>22227894<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are secreted endopeptidases that play an essential role in remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM). MMPs are primarily active during development, when the majority of ECM remodeling events occurs. In adults, elevated MMP activity has been observed in many pathological conditions such as cancer and osteoarthritis. The proteolytic activity of MMPs is controlled by their natural inhibitors - the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). In addition to blocking MMP-mediated proteolysis, TIMPs have a number of MMP-independent functions including binding to cell surface proteins thereby stimulating signaling cascades. TIMP-2, the most studied member of the family, can both inhibit and activate MMPs directly, as well as inhibit MMP activity indirectly by upregulating expression of RECK, a membrane anchored MMP regulator. While TIMP-2 has been shown to play important roles in breast cancer, we describe how the MMP-independent effects of TIMP-2 can modulate the invasiveness of MCF-7, T47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Using an ALA + TIMP-2 mutant which is devoid of MMP inhibition, but still capable of initiating specific cell signaling cascades, we show that TIMP-2 can differentially affect MMP activity and cellular invasiveness in both an MMP dependent and independent manner. More specifically, MMP activity and invasiveness is increased with the addition of exogenous TIMP-2 in poorly invasive cell lines whereas it is decreased in highly invasive cells lines (MDA-MB-231). Conversely, the addition of ALA + TIMP-2 resulted in decreased invasiveness regardless of cell line.<newchar><newabs>23142541<newchar>The phenotypic switch underlying the differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts into hypersecretory myofibroblasts is critical for cardiac remodeling following myocardial infarction. Myofibroblasts facilitate wound repair in the myocardium by secreting and organizing extracellular matrix (ECM) during the wound healing process. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in myofibroblast differentiation are not well known. TGF-β has been shown to promote differentiation and this, combined with the robust mechanical environment in the heart, lead us to hypothesize that the mechanotransduction and TGF-β signaling pathways play active roles in the differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. Here, we show that the mechanosensitve ion channel TRPV4 is required for TGF-β1-induced differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. We found that the TRPV4-specific antagonist AB159908 and siRNA knockdown of TRPV4 significantly inhibited TGFβ1-induced differentiation as measured by incorporation of α-SMA into stress fibers. Further, we found that TGF-β1-induced myofibroblast differentiation was dependent on ECM stiffness, a response that was attenuated by TRPV4 blockade. Finally, TGF-β1 treated fibroblasts exhibited enhanced TRPV4 expression and TRPV4-mediated calcium influx compared to untreated controls. Taken together these results suggest for the first time that the mechanosensitive ion channel, TRPV4, regulates cardiac fibroblast differentiation to myofibroblasts by integrating signals from TGF-β1 and mechanical factors.<newchar><newabs>23092186<newchar>Myofibroblasts accumulate in the spaces between organ structures and produce extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, including collagen I. They are the primary &quot;effector&quot; cells in tissue remodeling and fibrosis. Previously, leukocyte progenitors termed fibrocytes and myofibroblasts generated from epithelial cells through epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were considered the primary sources of ECM-producing myofibroblasts in injured tissues. However, genetic fate mapping experiments suggest that mesenchyme-derived cells, known as resident fibroblasts, and pericytes are the primary precursors of scar-forming myofibroblasts, whereas epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and myeloid leukocytes contribute to fibrogenesis predominantly by producing key fibrogenic cytokines and by promoting cell-to-cell communication. Numerous cytokines derived from T cells, macrophages, and other myeloid cell populations are important drivers of myofibroblast differentiation. Monocyte-derived cell populations are key regulators of the fibrotic process: They act as a brake on the processes driving fibrogenesis, and they dismantle and degrade established fibrosis. We discuss the origins, modes of activation, and fate of myofibroblasts in various important fibrotic diseases and describe how manipulation of macrophage activation could help ameliorate fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>24001958<newchar>Rete ridge has important functions in the epidermis, but the current tissue engineered oral mucosa or skin equivalents are generally lack of this structure. To regenerate a rete ridge structure in the oral mucosa equivalents, we firstly attempted to make clear how rete ridge is formed in the oral mucosa and the preliminary study disclosed the mechanical stress evoked the morphogenesis of rete ridge. In this paper, we make a hypothesis that the morphogenesis of rete ridge is elicited by the physical forces and proceed with the internal pushing forces derived from the keratinocyte division, among these process, the activated ERK and PC cascades, accompanied with the MMPs liberated growth factors are working together to induce the keratinocyte proliferation, these cell divisions produced internal forces, which not only push the keratinocyte stem cells and progenitor cells to migrate in the contrary directions but also in turn to activate the ERK and PC cascades, meanwhile, the activated MMPs degrade the ECM of lamina propria, under these internal pushing forces and the remodeling of lamina propria, rete ridge is gradually formed. This hypothesis gives us the possibility to regenerate the rete ridge structure in the tissue engineered oral mucosa or skin equivalents through simulating the morphogenesis of rete ridge.<newchar><newabs>23970168<newchar>Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling enzyme, which is involved in the development and progression of many types of tumors. LOX dysfunction is observed in colorectal, breast and ovarian cancer. However, the precise effects and molecular mechanisms of LOX action in osteosarcoma progression are still unknown. We evaluated the role of LOX in human osteosarcoma cell lines and clinical tumor samples in order to determine the function of this molecule. In our study, we showed that the expression level of LOX mRNA and protein were decreased in human osteosarcoma tissues as compared with normal tissue samples. In addition, we employed adenovirus-mediated overexpression of LOX in U-2OS and HOS cells to investigate the role of LOX in osteosarcoma cell lines. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of LOX could efficiently increase the expression levels of LOX in osteosarcoma cell lines at both mRNA and protein levels. Increased expression of LOX inhibited the proliferation and migration of human osteosarcoma cells and promoted its apoptosis. Moreover, the Ki-67 and PCNA expression was decreased and MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression was inhibited. These findings also indicated that the effects of LOX may be mediated via the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway since LOX-mediated functions could be blocked by β-aminopropionitrile (β-APN), a LOX inhibitor. Taken together, our data indicated that LOX may be a tumor suppressor and could be regarded as a therapeutic target in human osteosarcoma.<newchar><newabs>19125644<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are widely used to facilitate remodeling and reconstruction of a variety of tissues in both preclinical animal studies and human clinical applications. The mechanisms by which such scaffolds influence the host tissue response are only partially understood, but it is logical that the mononuclear macrophage cell population plays a central role. The present study evaluated the role of macrophages that derive from peripheral blood in the degradation of ECM scaffolds. An established rat body wall reconstruction model was used to evaluate the degradation of carbodiimide (CDI)-crosslinked scaffolds composed of porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS), noncrosslinked SIS, and autologous body wall. To assess the role of circulating macrophages in the degradation process, the degradation of each scaffold was assessed with and without macrophage depletion caused by administration of clodronate-containing liposomes. Results showed that peripheral blood monocytes are required for the early and rapid degradation of both SIS scaffolds and autologous body wall, and that CDI crosslinked SIS is resistant to macrophage-mediated degradation.<newchar><newabs>21497667<newchar>Multiphoton microscopy has become a powerful imaging method for minimally invasive evaluation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and cellular structures deep within tissues in their native environments. This technology, which uses ultra-short femto-second laser pulses as the excitation source, is efficient in multiphoton excitation fluorescence (MPEF) of endogenously fluorescent macromolecular systems and induction of highly specific second harmonic generation (SHG) signals from non-centrosymmetric macromolecules such as fibrillar collagens. Both these signals can be captured simultaneously to provide spatially resolved 3D structural organization of ECM as well as cellular morphologies in lung or airway tissue with spectral specificity and sensitivity. These imaging modalities are minimally invasive since structures deep within tissues can be visualized without the need for tissue fixation and/or sectioning. Much of the traditional histological and chemical procedures associated with conventional microscopy methods, which may alter native structure of lung tissue samples, can be circumvented to generate more accurate 3D morphological and fine structural information. In addition to outlining basic principles associated with MPEF and SHG microscopy methods, this review reports potential uses of these high resolution imaging modalities in lung structural imaging. We place special emphasis on imaging 3D structural features of airways, visualizing and quantifying ECM remodeling associated with mouse asthma model as well as the potential uses for multiphoton microscopy in in vitro airway applications.<newchar><newabs>22093249<newchar>Macrophages are important in inflammation as well as in tissue repair processes. They can be activated by various stimuli and classified into two major groups: M1 (classically activated) or M2 (alternatively activated). Inflammation, angiogenesis and matrix remodeling play a major role in tissue repair. Here, we investigate the combined influence of a pro-angiogenic microenvironment and specific extracellular matrix (ECM) components or tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) on the dynamics of human macrophage polarization. We established that human angiogenically primed macrophages cultured on different ECM components exhibit an M2-like polarization. These M2-like macrophages polarized to M1 and M2 macrophages with classical (LPS and IFNγ) stimuli and alternative (IL-4 and IL-13) stimuli respectively. Moreover, these M1 and M2 (primary) polarized macrophages rapidly underwent a secondary (re)polarization to M2 and M1 with conditioned media from M2 and M1 primary polarized macrophages respectively. In these initial priming and later (re)polarization processes the soluble factors had a dominant and orchestrating role, while the type of ECM (collagen I, fibronectin, versus tissue culture polystyrene) did not play a crucial role on the polarization of macrophages.<newchar><newabs>21563860<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) have been used successfully in preclinical models and humans for constructive remodeling of functional, site-appropriate tissue after injury. The mechanisms underlying ECM-mediated constructive remodeling are not completely understood, but scaffold degradation and site-directed recruitment of both differentiated and progenitor cells are thought to play critical roles. Previous studies have shown that degradation products of ECM scaffolds can recruit a population of progenitor cells both in vitro and in vivo. The present study identified a single cryptic peptide derived from the α subunit of the collagen III molecule that is chemotactic for a well-characterized perivascular stem cell in vitro and causes the site-directed accumulation of progenitor cells in vivo. The oligopeptide was additionally chemotactic for human cortical neural stem cells, rat adipocyte stem cells, C2C12 myoblast cells, and rat Schwann cells in vitro. In an adult murine model of digit amputation, treatment with this peptide after mid-second phalanx amputation resulted in a greater number of Sox2+ and Sca1+,Lin- cells at the site of injury compared to controls. Since progenitor cell activation and recruitment are key prerequisites for epimorphic regeneration in adult mammalian tissues, endogenous site-directed recruitment of such cells has the potential to alter the default wound healing response from scar tissue toward regeneration.<newchar><newabs>22380687<newchar>Cutaneous wound healing is orchestrated by a number of physiological pathways that ultimately lead to reformation of skin integrity and the production of functional scar tissue. The remodeling of a wound is significantly affected by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which act to control the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Regulation of MMPs is imperative for wound healing as excessive levels of MMPs can lead to disproportionate destruction of the wound ECM compared to ECM deposition. In addition to human MMPs, bacterial proteases have been found to be influential in tissue breakdown and, as such, have a role to play in the healing of infected wounds. For example, the zinc-metalloproteinase, elastase, produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, induces degradation of fibroblast proteins and proteoglycans in chronic wounds and has also been shown to degrade host immune cell mediators. Microbial extracellular enzymes have also been shown to degrade human wound fluid and inhibit fibroblast cell growth. It is now being acknowledged that host and bacterial MMPs may act synergistically to cause tissue breakdown within the wound bed. Several studies have suggested that bacterial-derived secreted proteases may act to up-regulate the levels of MMPs produced by the host cells. Together, these findings indicate that bacterial phenotype in terms of protease producing potential of bacteria should be taken into consideration during diagnostic and clinical intervention of infected wound management. Furthermore, both host MMPs and those derived from infecting bacteria need to be targeted in order to increase the healing capacity of the injured tissue. The aim of this review is to investigate the evidence suggestive of a relationship between unregulated levels of both host and bacterial proteases and delayed wound healing.<newchar><newabs>12855577<newchar>The passage of leukocytes through basement membranes involves proteolytic degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components executed by focalized proteolysis. We have investigated whether the migration of leukocytes through 3-dimensional collagenous tissue scaffolds requires similar ECM breakdown. Human T blasts and SupT1 lymphoma cells expressed mRNA of MMP-9, MT1-MMP, MT4-MMP, cathepsin L, uPA, and uPAR as well as ADAM-9, -10, -11, -15, and -17. Upon long-term migration within 3-dimensional collagen matrices, however, no in situ collagenolysis was obtained by sensitive fluorescein isothiocyanate-collagen fragmentation analysis and confocal fluorescence/backscatter microscopy. Consistent with nonproteolytic migration, T-cell crawling and path generation were not impaired by protease inhibitor cocktail targeting MMPs, serine proteases, cysteine proteases, and cathepsins. Dynamic imaging of cell-ECM interactions showed T-cell migration as an amoeba-like process driven by adaptive morphology, crawling along collagen fibrils (contact guidance) and squeezing through pre-existing matrix gaps by vigorous shape change. The concept of nonproteolytic amoeboid migration was confirmed for multicomponent collagen lattices containing hyaluronan and chondroitin sulfate and for other migrating leukocytes including CD8+ T blasts, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, and U937 monocytic cells. Together, amoeboid shape change and contact guidance provide constitutive protease-independent mechanisms for leukocyte trafficking through interstitial tissues that are insensitive toward pharmacologic protease inhibitors.<newchar><newabs>22196970<newchar>The elastic modulus of bioengineered materials has a strong influence on the phenotype of many cells including cardiomyocytes. On polyacrylamide (PAA) gels that are laminated with ligands for integrins, cardiac myocytes develop well organized sarcomeres only when cultured on substrates with elastic moduli in the range 10 kPa-30 kPa, near those of the healthy tissue. On stiffer substrates (&gt;60 kPa) approximating the damaged heart, myocytes form stress fiber-like filament bundles but lack organized sarcomeres or an elongated shape. On soft (&lt;1 kPa) PAA gels myocytes exhibit disorganized actin networks and sarcomeres. However, when the polyacrylamide matrix is replaced by hyaluronic acid (HA) as the gel network to which integrin ligands are attached, robust development of functional neonatal rat ventricular myocytes occurs on gels with elastic moduli of 200 Pa, a stiffness far below that of the neonatal heart and on which myocytes would be amorphous and dysfunctional when cultured on polyacrylamide-based gels. The HA matrix by itself is not adhesive for myocytes, and the myocyte phenotype depends on the type of integrin ligand that is incorporated within the HA gel, with fibronectin, gelatin, or fibrinogen being more effective than collagen I. These results show that HA alters the integrin-dependent stiffness response of cells in vitro and suggests that expression of HA within the extracellular matrix (ECM) in vivo might similarly alter the response of cells that bind the ECM through integrins. The integration of HA with integrin-specific ECM signaling proteins provides a rationale for engineering a new class of soft hybrid hydrogels that can be used in therapeutic strategies to reverse the remodeling of the injured myocardium.<newchar><newabs>12475798<newchar>The adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, fibronectin, is important in the regulation and coordination of such complex processes as cell growth, migration, differentiation, and ECM organization. The deposition of fibronectin into the ECM is a cell-dependent process that is normally tightly regulated to ensure controlled matrix deposition. Increased deposition of fibronectin and collagen into the subepithelial space of the airways is observed in all forms of asthma and occurs early in the progression of the disease. Experimental evidence suggests a model in which fibronectin matrix accumulation contributes to the progression of asthma by altering both the structural properties of the airways and the functional properties of cells of the airway wall.<newchar><newabs>10369104<newchar>Glomerulopathic light chains (LCs) are associated with two distinct mesangiopathies: AL (light-chain-related) amyloidosis and light-chain deposition disease (LCDD) with immunomorphologic features that are well documented in the literature. Even though both conditions are caused by monoclonal LCs, these entities differ dramatically in their morphologic expressions. In AL amyloidosis the mesangial matrix is replaced by amyloid fibrils, while in LCDD the matrix increases as a consequence of deposition of excess extracellular matrix (ECM). The immunomorphologic mesangial alterations observed in biopsy material are closely reproduced in vitro when mesangial cells grown on an artificial matrix are incubated with monoclonal light chains obtained from the urine of patients with either condition. This article summarizes previously reported data, reports new findings, and focuses on integrating all the available information on the subject. When mesangial cells are incubated with LCDD-LCs, production of ECM proteins (collagen IV, laminin, fibronectin, and tenascin) is increased, with maximum effect at 72 hours post LC treatment. A concomitant decrease in collagenase IV activity further accentuates the accumulation of mesangial matrix. These effects are mediated through transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activation. In contrast, when mesangial cells are incubated with Am-LCs, a decrease in ECM protein production and a stimulatory effect on collagenase IV is observed, which results in matrix degradation and facilitates amyloid deposition. The decreased TGF-beta documented in the literature in this setting precludes adequate matrix repair. These findings substantiate the morphologic alterations observed in renal biopsy specimens and in the in vitro model. Using this in vitro model, it is then possible to delineate the LC interactions with putative receptors at the mesangial cell surface that regulate mesangial cell pathobiologic responses and mesangial matrix homeostasis.<newchar><newabs>18161483<newchar>Since its discovery as a reproductive hormone 80 years ago, relaxin has been implicated in a number of pregnancy-related functions involving extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and collagen degradation. It is now becoming evident that relaxin's ability to reduce matrix synthesis and increase ECM degradation has important implications in several nonreproductive organs, including the heart, lung, kidney, liver and skin. The identification of relaxin and RXFP1 (Relaxin family peptide receptor-1) mRNA and/or binding sites in cells or vessels of these nonreproductive tissues, has confirmed them as targets for relaxin binding and activity. Recent studies on Rln1 and Rxfp1 gene-knockout mice have established relaxin as an important naturally occurring and protective moderator of collagen turnover, leading to improved organ structure and function. Furthermore, through its ability to regulate the ECM and in particular, collagen at multiple levels, relaxin has emerged as a potent anti-fibrotic therapy, with rapid-occurring efficacy. It not only prevents fibrogenesis, but also reduces established scarring (fibrosis), which is a leading cause of organ failure and affects several tissues regardless of etiology. This chapter will summarize these coherent findings as a means of highlighting the significance and therapeutic potential of relaxin.<newchar><newabs>22634303<newchar>Airway smooth muscle (ASM) is the main regulator of bronchomotor tone. Extensive studies show that in addition to their physical property, human airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells can participate in inflammatory processes modulating the initiation, perpetuation, amplification, and perhaps resolution of airway inflammation. Upon stimulation or interaction with immune cells, ASM cells produce and secrete a variety of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, cell adhesion molecules, and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. These released mediators can, in turn, contribute to the inflammatory state, airway hyperresponsiveness, and airway remodeling present in asthma. As our knowledge of ASM myocyte biology improves, novel bioactive factors are emerging as potentially important regulators of inflammation. This review provides an overview of our understanding of some of these molecules, identifies rising questions, and proposes future studies to better define their role in ASM cell modulation of inflammation and immunity in the lung and respiratory diseases.<newchar><newabs>23322986<newchar>In addition to squamous cell carcinoma, the incidence of Barrett's esophagus with high-grade dysplasia and esophageal adenocarcinoma is rapidly increasing worldwide. Unfortunately, the current standard of care for esophageal pathology involves resection of the affected tissue, sometimes involving radical esophagectomy. Without exception, these procedures are associated with a high morbidity, compromised quality of life, and unacceptable mortality rates. Regenerative medicine approaches to functional tissue replacement include the use of biological and synthetic scaffolds to promote tissue remodeling and growth. In the case of esophageal repair, extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds have proven to be effective for the reconstruction of small patch defects, anastomosis reinforcement, and the prevention of stricture formation after endomucosal resection (EMR). More so, esophageal cancer patients treated with ECM scaffolds have shown complete restoration of a normal, functional, and disease-free epithelium after EMR. These studies provide evidence that a regenerative medicine approach may enable aggressive resection of neoplastic tissue without the need for radical esophagectomy and its associated complications.<newchar>Biomaterial mediated esophageal repair<n-term>Esophageal repair<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Extracellular matrix scaffold<n-term><newabs>23707512<newchar>Activin receptor-like kinase-1 or ALK-1 is a type I cell surface receptor for the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family of proteins. The role of ALK-1 in endothelial cells biology and in angiogenesis has been thoroughly studied by many authors. However, it has been recently suggested a possible role of ALK-1 in cardiovascular homeostasis. ALK-1 is not only expressed in endothelial cells but also in smooth muscle cells, myofibroblast, hepatic stellate cells, chondrocytes, monocytes, myoblasts, macrophages or fibroblasts, but its role in these cells have not been deeply analyzed. Due to the function of ALK-1 in these cells, this receptor plays a role in several cardiovascular diseases. Animals with ALK-1 haploinsufficiency and patients with mutations in Acvrl1 (the gene that codifies for ALK-1) develop type-2 Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia. Moreover, ALK-1 heterozygous mice develop pulmonary hypertension. Higher levels of ALK-1 have been observed in atherosclerotic plaques, suggesting a possible protector role of this receptor. ALK-1 deficiency is also related to the development of arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Besides, due to the ability of ALK-1 to regulate cell proliferation and migration, and to modulate extracellular matrix (ECM) protein expression in several cell types, ALK-1 has been now demonstrated to play an important role in cardiovascular remodeling. In this review, we would like to offer a complete vision of the role of ALK-1 in many process related to cardiovascular homeostasis, and the involvement of this protein in the development of cardiovascular diseases, suggesting the possibility of using the ALK-1/smad-1 pathway as a powerful therapeutic target.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>Arteriovenous malformation<n-term>HHT<n-term>Pulmonary hypertension<n-term>Smads<n-term>TGF-β<n-term><newabs>23727079<newchar>The extracellular matrix undergoes extensive remodeling during hepatocellular carcinoma and functions as a critical component of the tumor microenvironment by providing a substratum for cell adhesion and serving as a reservoir for a variety of cytokines and growth factors. Despite the clinical correlation between ECM deposition and hepatocellular carcinoma progression, it remains unclear how global extracellular matrix gene expression is altered in hepatocellular carcinoma and the molecular pathways that govern this change. Herein, a comprehensive analysis of the extracellular matrix transcriptome using an RNA-sequencing dataset provided by The Cancer Genome Atlas consortium was conducted and indicates substantial differential gene expression of key extracellular matrix collagens, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans in hepatocellular carcinoma. This analysis also reveals alternative expression of extracellular matrix gene transcript variants that could impact biological activity and serves as a framework for exploring the dynamic nature of the extracellular matrix transcriptome in cancer and identifying candidate genes for future exploration.<newchar>Cancer<n-term>Collagen<n-term>Glycoprotein<n-term>Proteoglycan<n-term>RNA-Seq<n-term><newabs>24745631<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common degenerative joint disease and no disease-modifying therapy for OA is currently available. Targeting articular cartilage alone may not be sufficient to halt this disease progression. Articular cartilage and subchondral bone act as a functional unit. Increasing evidence indicates that transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) plays a crucial role in maintaining homeostasis of both articular cartilage and subchondral bone. Activation of extracellular matrix (ECM) latent TGFβ at the appropriate time and location is a prerequisite for its function. Aberrant activation of TGFβ in the subchondral bone in response to an abnormal mechanical loading environment induces formation of osteroid islets at the onset of OA. As a result, alteration of subchondral bone structure changes the stress distribution on the articular cartilage and leads to its degeneration. Thus, inhibition of TGFβ activity in the subchondral bone may provide a new avenue of treatment for OA. In this review we will discuss the role of TGFβ in the homeostasis of articular cartilage and subchondral bone as a novel target for OA therapy.<newchar>TGFβ<n-term>articular cartilage<n-term>osteoarthritis<n-term>subchondral bone<n-term><newabs>22767184<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the main enzymes involved in arterial wall extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and remodeling, whose activity has been involved in various normal and pathologic processes, such as inflammation, fibrosis. As a result, the MMPs have come to consider as both therapeutic targets and diagnostic tools for the treatment and diagnosis of autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare autoimmune disease of unknown etiology characterized by an excessive over-production of collagen and other ECM, resulting in skin thickening and fibrosis of internal organs. In recent years, abnormal expression of MMPs has been demonstrated with the pathogenesis of SSc, and the association of different polymorphisms on MMPs genes with SSc has been extensively studied. This review describes the structure, function and regulation of MMPs and shortly summarizes current understanding on experimental findings, genetic associations of MMPs in SSc.<newchar><newabs>24391948<newchar>Alagille syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder involving bile duct paucity and cholestasis in addition to cardiac, skeletal, ophthalmologic, renal and vascular manifestations. Mutations in JAG1, encoding a ligand in the Notch signaling pathway, are found in 95% of patients meeting clinical criteria for Alagille syndrome. In order to define the role of Jag1 in the bile duct developmental abnormalities seen in ALGS, we previously created a Jag1 conditional knockout mouse model. Mice heterozygous for the Jag1 conditional and null alleles demonstrate abnormalities in postnatal bile duct growth and remodeling, with portal expansion and increased numbers of malformed bile ducts. In this study we report the results of microarray analysis and identify genes and pathways differentially expressed in the Jag1 conditional/null livers as compared with littermate controls. In the initial microarray analysis, we found that many of the genes up-regulated in the Jag1 conditional/null mutant livers were related to extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions, cell adhesion and cell migration. One of the most highly up-regulated genes was Ddr1, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) belonging to a large RTK family. We have found extensive co-localization of Jag1 and Ddr1 in bile ducts and blood vessels in postnatal liver. In addition, co-immunoprecipitation data provide evidence for a novel protein interaction between Jag1 and Ddr1. Further studies will be required to define the nature of this interaction and its functional consequences, which may have significant implications for bile duct remodeling and repair of liver injury.<newchar><newabs>23586018<newchar>The epidermis functions in skin as first defense line or barrier against environmental impacts, resting on extracellular matrix (ECM) of the dermis underneath. Both compartments are connected by the basement membrane (BM), composed of a set of distinct glycoproteins and proteoglycans. Herein we are reviewing molecular aspects of BM structure, composition, and function regarding not only (i) the dermoepidermal interface but also (ii) the resident microvasculature, primarily focusing on the per se nonscaffold forming components perlecan and nidogen-1 and nidogen-2. Depletion or functional deficiencies of any BM component are lethal at some stage of development or around birth, though BM defects vary between organs and tissues. Lethality problems were overcome by developmental stage- and skin-specific gene targeting or by cell grafting and organotypic (3D) cocultures of normal or defective cells, which allows recapitulating BM formation de novo. Thus, evidence is accumulating that BM assembly and turnover rely on mechanical properties and composition of the adjacent ECM and the dynamics of molecular assembly, including further &quot;minor&quot; local components, nidogens largely functioning as catalysts or molecular adaptors and perlecan as bridging stabilizer. Collectively, orchestration of BM assembly, remodeling, and the role of individual players herein are determined by the developmental, tissue-specific, or functional context.<newchar><newabs>16504415<newchar>Extracellular matrix plays two-edged roles, inhibitor and promoter, in the carcinogenesis and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma. On the one hand, extracellular matrix provides the survival signals, and controls the proliferation, differentiation and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma. On the other hand, hepatocarcinoma cells create a permissive soil by extracellular matrix remodeling, result in high proliferation, low differentiation, apoptosis block, invasion and metastasis. These malignant phenotypes are related with the change of the capsule around hepatocarcinoma cells that composed by collagens I and IV, the cell-extracellular matrix interaction induced by laminin and its receptor-integrins, and the degradation of ECM which is regulated by proteolytic enzymes and their inhibitor. Thus, normalization of ECM may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for hepatocarcinoma cells.<newchar><newabs>17804598<newchar>Latent TGF-beta binding protein 1 (LTBP1) is a member of the LTBP/fibrillin family of extracellular proteins. Due to the usage of different promoters, LTBP1 exists in two major forms, long (L) and short (S), each expressed in a temporally and spatially unique fashion. Both LTBP1 molecules covalently interact with latent TGF-beta and regulate its function, presumably via interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM). To explore the in vivo role of Ltbp1 in mouse development, at the time when only the L isoform is expressed, we mutated the Ltbp1L locus by gene targeting. Ltbp1L-null animals die shortly after birth from defects in heart development, consisting of the improper septation of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) and remodeling of the associated vessels. These cardiac anomalies present as persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA) and interrupted aortic arch (IAA), which are associated with the faulty function of cardiac neural crest cells (CNCCs). The lack of Ltbp1L in the ECM of the septating OFT and associated vessels results in altered gene expression and function of CNCCs and decreased Tgf-beta activity in the OFT. This phenotype reveals a crucial role for Ltbp1L and matrix as extracellular regulators of Tgf-beta activity in heart organogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21618406<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the developing heart contains numerous molecules that form a dynamic environment that plays an active and crucial role in the regulation of cellular events. ECM molecules found in the heart include hyaluronan, fibronectin, fibrillin, proteoglycans, and collagens. Tight regulation of the spatiotemporal expression, and the proteolytic processing of ECM components by proteases including members of the ADAMTS family, is essential for normal cardiac development. Perturbation of the expression of genes involved in matrix composition and remodeling can interfere with a myriad of events involved in the formation of the four-chambered heart and result in prenatal lethality or cardiac malformations as seen in humans with congenital heart disease. In this review, we summarize what is known about the specific importance of some of the components of the ECM in relation to the cardiovascular development.<newchar><newabs>14652629<newchar>It is presently accepted that fibroblast/myofibroblast modulation represents a crucial step in granulation tissue contraction and in the production of the connective tissue deformations typical of fibrocontractive diseases. In addition to synthesizing extracellular matrix (ECM) components, myofibroblasts can develop tensile force through the neoformation of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) containing cytoplasmic stress fibers. Tension has been shown to be a crucial regulator of connective tissue remodeling. In order to coordinate tension distribution within connective tissue, cell-matrix and cell-cell contacts appear essential. This review addresses the formation, molecular structure and function of such structures that are characterized by their association with intracytoplasmic actin filaments. Actin associated cell-matrix adhesions appear to provide the interface between ECM components and intracellular stress fibers, thus contributing to the transmission of force to the substrate and to the detection of stress level in the matrix. Cell-cell adherens junctions appear to synchronize myofibroblast contractile activity. Further studies investigating the functions of these structures will be important for the understanding of the mechanisms of granulation tissue evolution and for the planification of strategies in view of influencing connective tissue deformations.<newchar><newabs>16043661<newchar>We investigated the role of angiotensin II type 1 (AT1) and AT2 receptors, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and extracellular matrix (ECM) components involved in vascular remodeling of resistance arteries induced by angiotensin II (Ang II). Sprague-Dawley rats received Ang II (120 ng/kg per minute SC) +/- the AT1 antagonist losartan (10 mg/kg per day PO), the AT1/AT2 antagonist Sar1-Ile8-Ang II (Sar-Ile; 10 microg/kg per minute SC), or hydralazine (25 mg/kg per day PO) for 7 days. Structure and mechanical properties of small mesenteric arteries were evaluated on a pressurized myograph. Ang II increased growth index (+21%), which was partially decreased by losartan (-11%) and abrogated by Sar-Ile. Hydralazine markedly increased growth index (+32%) despite systolic blood pressure (BP) lowering, suggesting a BP-independent effect of Ang II on vascular growth. Elastic modulus was increased by Sar-Ile compared with Ang II and control. Vascular type I collagen was reduced (P&lt;0.05), whereas fibronectin increased significantly with Sar-Ile. Vascular tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 binding to MMP-2 was abrogated by Sar-Ile, but MMP-2 activity was significantly increased compared with losartan, Ang II, and controls. Thus, AT1 blockade exerted antigrowth effects and reduced stiffness of small resistance arteries by decreasing nonelastic fibrillar components (collagen and fibronectin). Concomitant AT1/AT2 blockade prevented growth, reduced collagen type I and elastin deposition but increased vascular stiffness, fibronectin, and MMP-2 activity. These results demonstrate opposing roles of AT1 receptors that increase fibronectin and vascular stiffness and AT2 receptors that decrease MMP-2 and increase elastin. Changes in vascular wall mechanics, ECM deposition, and MMP activity are thus modulated differentially by Ang II receptors.<newchar><newabs>23525608<newchar>Hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with aortic aneurysm, however, the mechanisms are unclear. We hypothesize that the expression level of genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, oxidative stress, and enzymes involved in homocysteine metabolism pathway in aortic aneurysm and hyperhomocysteinemia are differentially regulated by DNA methylation. We studied the mRNA levels of MTHFR, SAHH, MMP-1, -9, TIMP-1, -4, peroxiredoxin, NOX-2, -3 (NAPDH oxidase subunits), collagen and elastin in normal and aortic aneurysm tissues from humans and aorta tissue from HHcy (Cystathionine beta synthase heterozygote knockout, CBS+/-) mice treated with high methionine diet. The total RNA was extracted using Trizol method and RT-PCR was performed. Protein expression of MTHFR, H3K9 (trimethyl) and TIMP4 were studied in mice using immunohistochemistry. MTHFR and TIMP4 expression was seen to be increasing in both human aneurysm samples as well as HHcy CBS+/- mice. There was increased expression of MMP9, peroxiredoxin and decreased expression of MMP1, Collagen I and IV was noted in thoracic aortic aneurysm samples. Increased Collagen IV and decreased Collagen I levels were seen in CBS +/- HHcy mice compared to their wild type controls. Since DNA methylation regulates gene expression of enzymes in Hcy metabolism pathway, we also measured the mRNA levels of DNMTs, MBD2 and H3K9. The results suggest an increase in the levels of DNMT1, 3a, MBD2 and H3K9 in CBS +/- aorta compared to their wild type controls. Our findings suggest a possible role of methylation in regulation of expression of genes involved in matrix remodeling and homocysteine metabolism.<newchar>CBS<n-term>Homocysteine<n-term>MMP<n-term>MTHFR<n-term>TIMP<n-term>aortic aneurysm<n-term>collagen<n-term><newabs>10763815<newchar>Mammary gland which undergoes proliferation, differentiation and involution in adult life is a useful model system to study the role of extracellular matrix (ECM) in regulating tissue specific functions. The involution that follows weaning results in the suppression of casein gene expression, collapse of alveolar structures and degradation of basement membrane as evidenced by biochemical analysis of matrix components like proteoglycans and collagen. Differential expression of three different MMPs viz. 130 K, 68 K and 60 K with varying specificity to Col IV of basement membrane and Col I of stroma, their selective inhibition by TIMP and proteoglycans and modulation by estrogen highlight the importance of these in the remodeling of the ECM in the mammary gland. The inhibition of these MMPs by glycosaminoglycans, particularly CS and change in the concentration of CS at different stages of mammary gland development suggests the existence of a novel mechanism for the regulation of the activity of MMPs at extracellular sites.<newchar><newabs>23026977<newchar>Accumulating evidence suggests that extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling plays a significant role following acute ischemic stroke (AIS). Decorin (DCN) is a well-recognized molecule present in the ECM; however, the role of DCN in AIS remains unknown. The present study aimed to investigate whether plasma concentrations of DCN are altered in patients following an AIS and whether they are correlated with matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) levels and other laboratory and clinical variables. Plasma concentrations of DCN were assessed in 102 patients with AIS (less than 7 days) and 120 control subjects using ELISA assays. The correlation between DCN concentrations and MMP-2 levels, Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) subtypes, stroke severity and risk factors were evaluated. The expression of DCN was significantly decreased in patients with AIS (P&lt;0.001), particularly in the large-artery atherosclerosis (LAAS) group. The levels of DCN were positively correlated with MMP-2 (R=0.332; P&lt;0.001), thus MMP-2 is an independent predictor of DCN concentration (P&lt;0.001). DCN levels below 8,500 pg/ml had sensitivity and specificity values of AIS of 79.4 and 62.8%, respectively and DCN below 8,500 pg/ml was associated with AIS (OR=4.8; 95% CI: 2.1-11.1; P&lt;0.001) following adjustment for potential confounders. In conclusion, for the first time, a reduction in DCN was detected in patients following AIS and these altered plasma concentrations were correlated with MMP-2. Larger studies are required to further investigate whether DCN is involved in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke.<newchar><newabs>23398532<newchar>Pressure overload induces cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling and results in heart failure. ECM remodelling by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is primarily regulated by their target inhibitors, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). It is known that TIMP-2 is highly expressed in myocardium and is required for cell surface activation of pro-MMP-2. We and others have reported that imbalance between angiogenic growth factors and anti-angiogenic factors results in transition from compensatory cardiac hypertrophy to heart failure. We previously reported the pro-angiogenic role of MMP-2 in cardiac compensation, however, the specific role of TIMP-2 during pressure overload is yet unclear. We hypothesize that genetic ablation of TIMP-2 exacerbates the adverse cardiac matrix remodelling due to lack of pro-angiogenic MMP-2 and increase in anti-angiogenic factors during pressure overload stress and results in severe heart failure. To verify this, ascending aortic banding (AB) was created to mimic pressure overload, in wild type C57BL6/J and TIMP-2-/- (model of MMP-2 deficiency) mice. Left ventricular (LV) function assessed by echocardiography and pressure-volume loop studies showed severe LV dysfunction in TIMP-2-/- AB mice compared to controls. Expression of MMP-2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was decreased and expression of MMP-9, anti-angiogenic factors endostatin and angiostatin was increased in TIMP-2-/- AB mice compared with wild type AB mice. Connexins (Cx) are the gap junction proteins that are widely present in the myocardium and play an important role in endothelial-myocyte coupling. Our results showed that expression of Cx 37 and 43 was decreased in TIMP-2-/- AB mice compared with corresponding wild type controls. These results suggest that genetic ablation of TIMP-2 decrease the expression of pro-angiogenic MMP-2, VEGF and increases anti-angiogenic factors that results in exacerbated abnormal ventricular remodelling leading to severe heart failure.<newchar><newabs>18803461<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in vascular tissue structure, maintenance, and function. Lysyl oxidases catalyze a key step in the posttranslational cross-linking of elastin and collagens in the ECM. Gene knockout studies in mice suggested a role for lysyl oxidase-like (LOXL1) in adult elastin synthesis and a role for its isoform, lysyl oxidase (LOX), in the synthesis of both collagens and elastin during development. However, the relative expression of both isoforms as a function of age is not known and was therefore investigated here. LOX and LOXL1 immunohistochemistry and real-time RT-PCR were performed during development, growth and aging in the aorta of LOU and Brown-Norway (BN) rats, two inbred strains with different susceptibilities to arterial fragility. In addition, expression of genes encoding for elastic fiber proteins and type I collagen, together with elastin and collagen contents, was measured in adult and old rat aortas. High aortic LOX expression was observed early in the development (embryonic day 15), followed by a drastic reduction in adulthood, whereas LOXL1 was mainly detectable in the intima and media; its expression was maintained throughout life in the LOU rat. Expression of tropoelastin, type-I collagen, and LOXL1 genes was reduced in the aorta of 6-week-old BN rats. Aging is characterized by a decreased elastin/collagen ratio and a greatly decreased expression of LOX, tropoelastin, and type-I collagen. These findings indicate a different spatial and temporal expression of LOX and LOXL1 during growth and aging in the rat aorta and suggest specific roles for LOX and LOXL1 in the synthesis and remodeling of elastic and collagen fibers.<newchar><newabs>18661337<newchar>Emmprin/CD147 is a cell membrane glycoprotein that belongs to the Ig superfamily and is involved in numerous physiological and pathological systems. Through its ability to interact with multiple partners within the cell surface and its potential to regulate the expression of several targets within the cell, emmprin may have different functions depending on the cell or tissue type. However, its role in tissue remodeling remains the most clearly demonstrated. Emmprin is able to induce, in the same cellular model, both the matrix metalloproteinases and the serine protease urokinase plasminogen activator, whose concerted action in the breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during various physiopathological situations has been reported. In addition, emmprin also promotes myofibroblasts' differentiation and tissue contraction through the induction of alpha smooth muscle actin, thus expanding on the mechanism by which emmprin remodels ECM.<newchar><newabs>17097630<newchar>Murine ovarian folliculogenesis commences after birth involving oocyte growth, somatic cell differentiation and structural remodeling of follicle stromal boundaries. The extracellular metalloproteinase ADAMTS-1 has activity against proteoglycans and collagen and is produced by the granulosa cells of ovarian follicles. Mice with ADAMTS-1 gene disruption are subfertile due to an unknown mechanism resulting in severely reduced ovulation. Here we show that ADAMTS-1 is necessary for structural remodeling during ovarian follicle growth. A significant reduction in the number of healthy growing follicles and corresponding follicle dysmorphogenesis commencing at the stage of antrum formation was identified in ADAMTS-1-/- ovaries. Morphological analysis and immunostaining of basement membrane components identified stages of follicle dysgenesis from focal disruption in ECM integrity to complete loss of follicular structures. Cells expressing the thecal marker Cyp-17 were lost from dysgenic regions, while oocytes and dispersed cells expressing the granulosa cell marker anti-mullerian hormone persisted in ovarian stroma. Furthermore, we found that the ovarian lymphatic system develops coincidentally with follicular development in early postnatal life but is severely delayed in ADAMTS-1-/- ovaries. These novel roles for ADAMTS-1 in structural maintenance of follicular basement membranes and lymphangiogenesis provide new mechanistic understanding of folliculogenesis, fertility and disease.<newchar><newabs>18805423<newchar>Congestive heart failure (CHF) causes arrhythmogenic, structural and contractile remodeling, with important atrial-ventricular differences: atria show faster and greater inflammation, cell-death and fibrosis. The present study assessed time-dependent left atrial (LA) and ventricular (LV) gene-expression changes in CHF. Groups of dogs were submitted to ventricular tachypacing (VTP, 240 bpm) for 24 h or 2 weeks, and compared to sham-instrumented animals. RNA from isolated LA and LV cardiomyocytes of each dog was analyzed by canine-specific microarrays (&gt;21,700 probe-sets). LA showed dramatic gene-expression changes, with 4785 transcripts significantly-altered (Q&lt;5) at 24-hour and 6284 at 2-week VTP. LV gene-changes were more limited, with 52 significantly-altered at 24-hour and 130 at 2-week VTP. Particularly marked differences were seen in ECM genes, with 153 changed in LA (e.g. approximately 65-fold increase in collagen-1) at 2-week VTP versus 2 in LV; DNA/RNA genes (LA=358, LV=7); protein biosynthesis (LA=327, LV=14); membrane transport (LA=230, LV=8); cell structure and mobility (LA=159, LV=6) and coagulation/inflammation (LA=147, LV=1). Noteworthy changes in LV were genes involved in metabolism (35 genes; creatine-kinase B increased 8-fold at 2-week VTP) and Ca(2+)-signalling. LA versus LV differential gene-expression decreased over time: 1567 genes were differentially expressed (Q&lt;1) at baseline, 1499 at 24-hour and 897 at 2-week VTP. Pathway analysis revealed particularly-important changes in LA for mitogen-activated protein-kinase, apoptotic, and ubiquitin/proteasome systems, and LV for Krebs cycle and electron-transfer complex I/II genes. VTP-induced CHF causes dramatically more gene-expression changes in LA than LV, dynamically altering the LA-LV differential gene-expression pattern. These results are relevant to understanding chamber-specific remodeling in CHF.<newchar><newabs>15787096<newchar>We had previously found that selective restriction of amino acids inhibits invasion of human A375 melanoma. Integrins, cell surface receptors for the components of extracellular matrix (ECM), are activated during cell adhesion and spreading, and initiate signaling pathways that control growth and invasion of tumor cells. We examined the effect of tyrosine (Tyr) and phenylalanine (Phe), methionine (Met) or glutamine (Gln) restriction on attachment and spreading of A375 and MeWo melanoma cell lines on fibronectin and laminin. In A375 cells, restriction of Tyr/Phe or Met inhibited attachment to and spreading on laminin and fibronectin, inhibited alpha3 and alpha4 integrin expression, and inhibited accumulation of FAK-Tyr397 and F-actin at leading edges of cell protrusions. Tyr/Phe restriction also inhibited attachment-induced autophosporylation of FAK-Tyr397. In MeWo cells, the order of inhibition by amino acid restriction on cell attachment and spreading was as follows: Gln &gt; Tyr/Phe &gt; Met. Restriction of Gln reduced alpha5 integrin expression. All amino acid restrictions similarly inhibited phosphorylation of FAK-Tyr397, FAK-Tyr577, FAK-Tyr861 and paxillin-Tyr31. Gln restriction exhibited the strongest inhibition of actin cytoskeleton remodeling during the cell spreading. The present study reveals that specific amino acid restriction inhibits attachment and spreading of melanoma via inhibition of specific integrin expression, inhibition of integrin-mediated FAK phosphorylation, and modulation of actin cytoskeleton remodeling. These data provide additional understanding of the mechanism by which specific amino acid restriction controls invasion and migration of melanoma.<newchar><newabs>12092772<newchar>This study aimed at evaluating acute pulmonary remodeling, focusing on alterations of fibers of the collagenous and elastic systems in ARDS in the exudative phase according to the etiology of the disease. ARDS patients (n = 23), who died in our institution between 1989 and 1997, were retrospectively studied. Ten patients who died in accidents, without any pathological changes in the lung, and ten patients with Congestive Heart Failure (CHF), submitted to mechanical ventilation, were used as control groups. Histological slides were sampled from the autopsied lungs and stained by the Picrosirius and Weigert's resorcin-fuchsin methods. The fiber content of the collagenous and elastic systems of the alveolar septum was measured by image analysis. All patients were in the early ARDS phase (n = 23), 10 pulmonary and 13 extra-pulmonary diseases. Collagen content was greater in pulmonary (1.23+/-0.27) than in extra-pulmonary (0.92+/-0.39) ARDS in the early phase of the disease (p = 0.05). No differences were observed concerning the elastic fibers' content. Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling occurs early in the development of acute lung injury and appears to depend on the site of initial insult (pulmonary or extrapulmonary). The present study provides the basis for a prospective, controlled investigation.<newchar><newabs>15468879<newchar>Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) evaluation were carried out in the in vivo skin construct using fibrin as biomaterial. To investigate its progressive remodeling, nude mice were grafted and the Extracellular Matrix (ECM) components were studied at four and eight weeks post-grafting. It was discovered that by 4 weeks of remodeling the skin construct acquired its native structure.<newchar><newabs>12658359<newchar>Cisplatin is an effective antitumor drug, but nephrotoxicity has restricted its clinical use. Renal interstitial fibrosis is a major complication of cisplatin treatment, due to the increased accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Ets-1 protein plays a role in matrix remodeling by regulating matrix-degrading enzymes. We studied the role of Ets-1, matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), and interstitial collagen (type III) in experimental cisplatin nephropathy. Wistar rats ( n = 24) were treated with cisplatin (6 mg/kg), and killed on days 3, 7, and 14, along with control rats. By immunohistochemistry, a significant increase ( P &lt; 0.02) in the number of Ets-1-positive cells (40.09 +/- 1.52) was detected in kidneys of cisplatin-treated rats on day 3, compared with the number in control rat kidneys (29.80 +/- 0.13). The number of Ets-1-positive cells decreased in kidneys from cisplatin-treated rats on days 7 (10.93 +/- 1.20) and 14 (12.16 +/- 0.60). The expression of MMP-1 showed a similar pattern, increasing on day 3, but decreasing on days 7 and 14. The decreased levels of Ets-1 and MMP-1 were associated with increased interstitial accumulation of collagen in kidneys of cisplatin-treated rats on day 14. Molecular interactions among Ets-1, MMP-1, and type III collagens might play a role in matrix remodeling in cisplatin nephropathy.<newchar><newabs>22819851<newchar>Certain forms of heart disease involve gross morphological changes to the myocardium that alter its hemodynamic loading conditions. These changes can ultimately lead to the increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as collagen and fibronectin, which together work to pathologically alter the myocardium's bulk tissue mechanics. In addition to changing the mechanical properties of the heart, this maladaptive remodeling gives rise to changes in myocardium electrical conductivity and synchrony since the tissue's mechanical properties are intimately tied to its electrical characteristics. This phenomenon, called mechanoelectrical coupling (MEC), can render individuals affected by heart disease arrhythmogenic and susceptible to Sudden Cardiac Death (SCD). The underlying mechanisms of MEC have been attributed to various processes, including the action of stretch activated channels and changes in troponin C-Ca(2+) binding affinity. However, changes in the heart post infarction or due to congenital myopathies are also accompanied by shifts in the expression of various molecular components of cardiomyocytes, including the mechanosensitive family of integrin proteins. As transmembrane proteins, integrins mechanically couple the ECM with the intracellular cytoskeleton and have been implicated in mediating ion homeostasis in various cell types, including neurons and smooth muscle. Given evidence of altered integrin expression in the setting of heart disease coupled with the associated increased risk for arrhythmia, we argue in this review that integrin signaling contributes to MEC. In light of the significant mortality associated with arrhythmia and SCD, close examination of all culpable mechanisms, including integrin-mediated MEC, is necessary.<newchar><newabs>18487357<newchar>Hypoxia causes abnormal neonatal pulmonary artery remodeling (PAR) and inhibition of alveolar development (IAD). Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is an important regulator of lung development and repair from injury. We tested the hypothesis that inhibition of TGF-beta signaling attenuates hypoxia-induced PAR and IAD. Mice with an inducible dominant-negative mutation of the TGF-beta type II receptor (DNTGFbetaRII) and nontransgenic wild-type (WT) mice were exposed to hypoxia (12% O(2)) or air from birth to 14 days of age. Expression of DNTGFbetaRII was induced by 20 microg/g ZnSO(4) given intraperitoneally daily from birth. PAR, IAD, cell proliferation, and expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins were assessed. In WT mice, hypoxia led to thicker, more muscularized resistance pulmonary arteries and impaired alveolarization, accompanied by increases in active TGF-beta and phosphorylated Smad2. Hypoxia-induced PAR and IAD were greatly attenuated in DNTGFbetaRII mice given ZnSO(4) compared with WT control mice and DNTGFbetaRII mice not given ZnSO(4). The stimulatory effects of hypoxic exposure on pulmonary arterial cell proliferation and lung ECM proteins were abrogated in DNTGFbetaRII mice given ZnSO(4). These data support the conclusion that TGF-beta plays an important role in hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular adaptation and IAD in the newborn animal model.<newchar><newabs>23857156<newchar>In abnormal skin wound healing, hypertrophic scars (HS) are characterized by excessive fibroblast hypercellularity and an overproduction of collagen, leading to atypical extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Although the exact mechanisms of HS remain unclear, decreased HS fibroblast (HSFB) apoptosis and increased proliferation are evident in the development of HS. In this study, the contribution of the second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases/direct inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP)-binding protein with a low isoelectric point (pI) (Smac/DIABLO), an apoptosis-promoting protein released from the mitochondria, was investigated in human normal skin and HSFB cultures. The expression of Smac/DIABLO is usually decreased in many malignant tumors compared with normal tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis of skin tissues and the western blot analyses of fibroblasts revealed that the expression of Smac/DIABLO was lower in HS tissues compared with normal skin tissues. Of note, adenovirus-mediated Smac/DIABLO overexpression in the cultured HSFBs significantly reduced cell proliferation, as detected by the cell counting kit-8, and increased caspase-3 and -9 activity, as detected by spectrofluorimetry. In addition, it increased apoptosis, as detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Furthermore, we found that the silencing of Smac with siRNA in the HSFBs induced a noticeable decrease in caspase-3 and -9 activity, leading to a significant reduction in apoptosis. In addition, the mRNA expression of type I and III pro-collagen detected in the HSFBs was significantly increased following the silencing of Smac with siRNA and was inhibited following Smac/DIABLO overexpression, as shown by real-time RT-PCR. In conclusion, Smac/DIABLO decreases the proliferation and increases the apoptosis of HSFBs. To our knowledge, the data from our study suggest for the first time that Smac/DIABLO is a novel therapeutic target for HS.<newchar><newabs>22906411<newchar>Volumetric muscle loss (VML) resulting from traumatic accidents, tumor ablation, or degenerative disease is associated with limited treatment options and high morbidity. The lack of a reliable and reproducible animal model of VML has hindered the development of effective therapeutic strategies. The present study describes a critical-sized excisional defect within the mouse quadriceps muscle that results in an irrecoverable volumetric defect. This model of VML was used to evaluate the efficacy of a surgically placed inductive biologic scaffold material composed of porcine small intestinal submucosa-extracellular matrix (SIS-ECM). The targeted placement of an SIS-ECM scaffold within the defect was associated with constructive tissue remodeling including the formation of site-appropriate skeletal muscle tissue. The present study provides a reproducible animal model with which to study VML and shows the therapeutic potential of a bioscaffold-based regenerative medicine approach to VML.<newchar><newabs>22618526<newchar>Degradation and resynthesis of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are essential during tissue remodeling. Expansion of the vascular intima in atherosclerosis and restenosis following injury is dependent upon smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation and migration. The migration of SMC from media to intima critically depends on degradation of ECM protein by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMP inhibitors and eNOS gene transfer have been shown to inhibit SMC migration in vitro and neointima formation in vivo. Nitric oxide (NO) and cyclic-GMP have been implicated in the inhibition of VSMC migration. But, there are few studies addressing the role of NO signaling pathways on the expression of MMPs. Here we reported the involvement of cyclic-GMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) (an important mediator of NO and cGMP signaling pathway in VSMC) on MMP-2 expression in rat aortic SMC. The goal of the present study was to gain insight into the possible involvement of PKG on MMP-2 in rat aortic SMC. MMP-2 protein and mRNA level and activity were downregulated in PKG-expressing cells as compared to PKG-deficient cells. In addition, the secretion of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) was increased in PKG-expressing cells as compared to PKG-deficient cells. PKG-specific membrane permeable peptide inhibitor (DT-2) reverses the process. Interestingly, little or no changes of MMP-9 were observed throughout the study. Taken together our data suggest the possible role of PKG in the suppression of MMP-2.<newchar><newabs>22984613<newchar>The adhesion receptor β3 integrin regulates diverse cellular functions in various tissues. As β3 integrin has been implicated in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, we sought to explore the role of β3 integrin in cardiac fibrosis by using wild type (WT) and β3 integrin null (β3-/-) mice for in vivo pressure overload (PO) and in vitro primary cardiac fibroblast phenotypic studies. Compared to WT mice, β3-/- mice upon pressure overload hypertrophy for 4 wk by transverse aortic constriction (TAC) showed a substantially reduced accumulation of interstitial fibronectin and collagen. Moreover, pressure overloaded LV from β3-/- mice exhibited reduced levels of both fibroblast proliferation and fibroblast-specific protein-1 (FSP1) expression in early time points of PO. To test if the observed impairment of ECM accumulation in β3-/- mice was due to compromised cardiac fibroblast function, we analyzed primary cardiac fibroblasts from WT and β3-/- mice for adhesion to ECM proteins, cell spreading, proliferation, and migration in response to platelet derived growth factor-BB (PDGF, a growth factor known to promote fibrosis) stimulation. Our results showed that β3-/- cardiac fibroblasts exhibited a significant reduction in cell-matrix adhesion, cell spreading, proliferation and migration. In addition, the activation of PDGF receptor associated tyrosine kinase and non-receptor tyrosine kinase Pyk2, upon PDGF stimulation were impaired in β3-/- cells. Adenoviral expression of a dominant negative form of Pyk2 (Y402F) resulted in reduced accumulation of fibronectin. These results indicate that β3 integrin-mediated Pyk2 signaling in cardiac fibroblasts plays a critical role in PO-induced cardiac fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>22677491<newchar>Contraction of small artery (diameters typically less than 250 μm) vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) plays a critical role in local control of blood flow and arterial pressure through its affect on vascular caliber. Specifically, contraction of small arteries in response to increased intraluminal pressure is referred to as the myogenic response and represents an important role for mechanotransduction. Critical questions remain as to how changes in pressure are sensed by VSMCs and transduced across the cell membrane to tune the contractile state of the cell. Recent studies suggest a pivotal role for interactions between VSMCs and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Thus, pressure-induced deformation of ECM proteins and their cell surface receptors (for example, integrins) may initiate contraction and cytoskeletal remodeling through modulation of ion channels, membrane depolarization, increased intracellular Ca(2+) and actomyosin crossbridge cycling. Importantly, it is argued that the contractile properties of small artery VSMCs reflect an intimate and integrated interaction with their extracellular environment and the three-dimensional structure of the vessel wall.<newchar><newabs>23796708<newchar>Membrane type 1 (MT1)-MMP is a member of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that regulates extracellular matrix remodeling. In addition, MT1-MMP also serves as a multi-functional protein. However, the functional role of MT1-MMP in human endothelial cells remains unclear. In this study we use real-time PCR and Western blotting to demonstrate for the first time that MMP-2 expression is regulated by MT1-MMP in human endothelial cells. Moreover, MMP-2 activity is also modulated by MT1-MMP. In addition we found that endothelial cells, ECM adhesion and human endothelial cell tube formation, which are known to be regulated by MMP-2, are blocked by MT1-MMP siRNA. These results suggest that MT1-MMP plays an important role in regulating angiogenesis in human endothelial cells.<newchar>Angiogenesis<n-term>HUVECs<n-term>MMP-2<n-term>MT1-MMP<n-term><newabs>12555138<newchar>The dynamic interaction of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with the various cellular components of the heart is a fundamental process in cardiac remodeling. These cellular components include myocytes, and connective tissue cells adapt to the signals from the extracellular environment. Critical to this dynamic interaction are several classes of transmembrane receptors that provide both inside-out and outside-in signaling.<newchar><newabs>20107860<newchar>The central role of the adipose tissue in lipid metabolism places specific demands on the cell structure of adipocytes. The protein composition and dynamics of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is of crucial importance for the functioning of those cells. Adipogenesis is a bi-phasic process in which the ECM develops from a fibrillar to a laminar structure as cells move from the commitment phase to the growth phase characterized by storage of vast amounts of triglycerides. Mature adipocytes appear to spend a lot of energy on the maintenance of the ECM. ECM remodeling is mediated by a balanced complement of constructive and destructive enzymes together with their enhancers and inhibitors. ECM remodeling is an energy costing process regulated by insulin, by the energy metabolism, and by mechanical forces. In the obese, overgrowth of adipocytes may lead to instability of the ECM, possibly mediated by hypoxia.<newchar><newabs>22822400<newchar>Processes such as cell proliferation, angiogenesis, apoptosis, or invasion are strongly influenced by the surrounding microenvironment of the tumor. Therefore, the ability to change these surroundings represents an important property through which tumor cells are able to acquire specific functions necessary for tumor growth and dissemination. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) constitute key players in this process, allowing tumor cells to modify the extracellular matrix (ECM) and release cytokines, growth factors, and other cell-surface molecules, ultimately facilitating protease-dependent tumor progression. Remodeling of the ECM by collagenolytic enzymes such as MMP1, MMP8, MMP13, or the membrane-bound MT1-MMP as well as by other membrane-anchored proteases is required for invasion and recruitment of novel blood vessels. However, the multiple roles of the MMPs do not all fit into a simple pattern. Despite the pro-tumorigenic function of certain metalloproteinases, recent studies have shown that other members of these families, such as MMP8 or MMP11, have a protective role against tumor growth and metastasis in animal models. These studies have been further expanded by large-scale genomic analysis, revealing that the genes encoding metalloproteinases, such as MMP8, MMP27, ADAM7, and ADAM29, are recurrently mutated in specific tumors, while several ADAMTSs are epigenetically silenced in different cancers. The importance of these proteases in modifying the tumor microenvironment highlights the need for a deeper understanding of how stroma cells and the ECM can modulate tumor progression.<newchar>ADAM<n-term>cancer<n-term>matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>microenvironment<n-term>tumor<n-term><newabs>22536910<newchar>Dynamic loading and perfusion culture environments alone are known to enhance cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) production in dedifferentiated articular chondrocytes. In this study, we explored whether a combination of these factors would enhance these processes over a free-swelling (FS) condition using adult human articular chondrocytes embedded in 2% alginate. The alginate constructs were placed into a bioreactor for perfusion (P) only (100 μL/per minute) or perfusion and dynamic compressive loading (PL) culture (20% for 1 h, at 0.5 Hz), each day. Control FS alginate gels were maintained in six-well static culture. Gene expression analysis was conducted on days 7 and 14, while cell viability, immunostaining, and mechanical property testing were performed on day 14 only. Total glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content and GAG synthesis were assessed after 14 days. Col2a1 mRNA expression levels were significantly higher (at least threefold; p&lt;0.05) in both bioreactor conditions compared with FS by days 7 and 14. For all gene studies, no significant differences were seen between P and PL treatments. Aggrecan mRNA levels were not significantly altered in any condition although both GAG/DNA and (35)S GAG incorporation studies indicated higher GAG retention and synthesis in the FS treatment. Collagen type II protein deposition was low in all samples, link protein distribution was more diffuse in FS condition, and aggrecan deposition was located in the outer regions of the alginate constructs in both bioreactor conditions, yet more uniformly in the FS condition. Catabolic gene expression (matrix metalloproteinase 3 [MMP3] and inducible nitric oxide synthase [iNOS]) was higher in bioreactor conditions compared with FS, although iNOS expression levels decreased to approximately fourfold less than the FS condition by day 14. Our data indicate that conditions created in the bioreactor enhanced both anabolic and catabolic responses, similar to other loading studies. Perfusion was sufficient alone to promote this dual response. PL increased the deposition of aggrecan surrounding cells compared with the other conditions; however, overall low GAG retention in the bioreactor system was likely due to both perfusion and catabolic conditions created. Optimal conditions, which permit appropriate anabolic and catabolic processes for accumulation of ECM and tissue remodeling for neocartilage development, specifically for humans, are needed.<newchar><newabs>22642194<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes that degrade various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). MMPs could also regulate the activity of several non-ECM bioactive substrates and consequently affect different cellular functions. Members of the MMPs family include collagenases, gelatinases, stromelysins, matrilysins, membrane-type MMPs, and others. Pro-MMPs are cleaved into active MMPs, which in turn act on various substrates in the ECM and on the cell surface. MMPs play an important role in the regulation of numerous physiological processes including vascular remodeling and angiogenesis. MMPs may also be involved in vascular diseases such as hypertension, atherosclerosis, aortic aneurysm, and varicose veins. MMPs also play a role in the hemodynamic and vascular changes associated with pregnancy and preeclampsia. The role of MMPs is commonly assessed by measuring their gene expression, protein amount, and proteolytic activity using gel zymography. Because there are no specific activators of MMPs, MMP inhibitors are often used to investigate the role of MMPs in different physiologic processes and in the pathogenesis of specific diseases. MMP inhibitors include endogenous tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and pharmacological inhibitors such as zinc chelators, doxycycline, and marimastat. MMP inhibitors have been evaluated as diagnostic and therapeutic tools in cancer, autoimmune disease, and cardiovascular disease. Although several MMP inhibitors have been synthesized and tested both experimentally and clinically, only one MMP inhibitor, i.e., doxycycline, is currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration. This is mainly due to the undesirable side effects of MMP inhibitors especially on the musculoskeletal system. While most experimental and clinical trials of MMP inhibitors have not demonstrated significant benefits, some trials still showed promising results. With the advent of new genetic and pharmacological tools, disease-specific MMP inhibitors with fewer undesirable effects are being developed and could be useful in the management of vascular disease.<newchar><newabs>22896663<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases that primarily degrade components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Remodeling of the ECM by MMPs is important in both physiological and pathological processes, including organ generation/regeneration, angiogenesis, wound healing, inflammation and tumor growth. In the vasculature, MMPs play a role in beneficial processes such as angiogenesis, collateral artery formation and thrombus resolution. However, MMP expression is also implicated in the pathogenesis of vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, aortic aneurysms, plaque rupture and neointimal hyperplasia after balloon angioplasty. Here, we review the structure, functions and roles of MMPs in both neovascularization and vascular pathology and discuss the potential of, and challenges that face, adapting MMPs as therapeutic targets in vascular disease.<newchar><newabs>21526198<newchar>Epithelial ovarian cancer is an aggressive and deadly disease and understanding its invasion mechanisms is critical for its treatment. We sought to study the penetration/invasion of ovarian tumor cells into extracellular matrices (ECMs) using a fibroblast-derived three-dimensional (3D) culture model and time-lapse and confocal imaging. Twelve ovarian tumor cells were evaluated and classified into distinct groups based on their ECM remodeling phenotypes; those that degraded the ECM (represented by OVCAR5 cells) and those that did not (represented by OVCAR10 cells). Cells exhibiting a distinct ECM modifying behavior were also segregated by epithelial- or mesenchymal-like phenotypes and uPA or MMP-2/MMP-9 expression. The cells, which presented epithelial-like phenotypes, penetrated the ECM using proteases and maintained intact cell-cell interactions, while cells exhibiting mesenchymal phenotypes modified the matrices via Rho-associated serine/threonine kinase (ROCK) in the absence of apparent cell-cell interactions. Overall, this study demonstrates that different mechanisms of modifying matrices by ovarian tumor cells may reflect heterogeneity among tumors and emphasize the need to systematically assess these mechanisms to better design effective therapies.<newchar><newabs>23449734<newchar>Transforming growth factor-β₁ (TGF-β₁) is a central mediator in tissue remodeling processes, including fibrosis and airway smooth muscle (ASM) hyperplasia, as observed in asthma. The mechanisms underlying this response, however, remain unclear because TGF-β₁ exerts only weak mitogenic effects on ASM cells. In this study, we hypothesized that the mitogenic effect of TGF-β₁ on ASM is indirect and requires prolonged exposure to allow for extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. To address this hypothesis, we investigated the effects of acute and prolonged treatment with TGF-β₁, alone and in combination with the muscarinic receptor agonist methacholine, on human ASM cell proliferation. Acutely, TGF-β₁ exerted no mitogenic effect. However, prolonged treatment (for 7 d) with TGF-β₁ increased ASM cell proliferation and potentiated the platelet-derived growth factor-induced mitogenic response. Muscarinic receptor stimulation with methacholine synergistically enhanced the effect of TGF-β₁. Interestingly, the integrin-blocking peptide Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser, as well as integrin α5β1 function-blocking antibodies, inhibited the effects of TGF-β₁ and its combination with methacholine on cell proliferation. Accordingly, prolonged treatment with TGF-β₁ increased fibronectin expression, which was also synergistically enhanced by methacholine. The synergistic effects of methacholine on TGF-β₁-induced proliferation were reduced by the long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist tiotropium and the M₂ receptor subtype-selective antagonist gallamine, but not the M₃-selective antagonist DAU5884. In line with these findings, the irreversible Gi protein inhibitor pertussis toxin also prevented the potentiation of TGF-β₁-induced proliferation by methacholine. We conclude that prolonged exposure to TGF-β₁ enhances ASM cell proliferation, which is mediated by extracellular matrix-integrin interactions, and which can be enhanced by muscarinic M₂ receptor stimulation.<newchar><newabs>23834332<newchar>We have reported previously that Ac-SDKP (N-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline) reduces fibrosis and inflammation (in macrophages and mast cells). However, it is not known whether Ac-SDKP decreases collagen cross-linking and lymphocyte infiltration; lymphocytes modulate both collagen cross-linking and ECM (extracellular matrix) formation in hypertension. Thus we hypothesized that (i) in AngII (angiotensin II)-induced hypertension, Ac-SDKP prevents increases in cross-linked and total collagen by down-regulating LOX (lysyl oxidase), the enzyme responsible for cross-linking, and (ii) these effects are associated with decreased pro-fibrotic cytokine TGFβ (transforming growth factor β) and the pro-inflammatory transcription factor NF-κB (nuclear factor κB) and CD4+/CD8+ lymphocyte infiltration. We induced hypertension in rats by infusing AngII either alone or combined with Ac-SDKP for 3 weeks. Whereas Ac-SDKP failed to lower BP (blood pressure) or LV (left ventricular) hypertrophy, it did prevent AngII-induced increases in (i) cross-linked and total collagen, (ii) LOX mRNA expression and LOXL1 (LOX-like 1) protein, (iii) TGFβ expression, (iv) nuclear translocation of NF-κB, (v) CD4+/CD8+ lymphocyte infiltration, and (vi) CD68+ macrophages infiltration. In addition, we found a positive correlation between CD4+ infiltration and LOXL1 expression. In conclusion, the effect of Ac-SDKP on collagen cross-linking and total collagen may be due to reduced TGFβ1, LOXL1, and lymphocyte and macrophage infiltration, and its effect on inflammation could be due to lower NF-κB.<newchar><newabs>22434522<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a critical role in the development and invasion of primary breast tumors. Lysyl oxidase (LOX), which is an ECM remodeling enzyme, appears to play roles in promoting cancer cell motility and invasion. To ascertain whether LOX overexpression in breast tumor tissues from Asian patients is associated with decreases in metastasis-free and overall survival in breast cancer patients, the mRNA levels of LOX were examined in paired tumor/normal tissue samples using real-time RT-PCR analysis (n = 246 pair-matched samples). To test whether specifically targeting LOX by inhibiting its activity (using beta-aminopropionitrile (β-APN), a LOX inhibitor), mRNA expression (using siRNA), or protein expression (using 25 μM magnolol) attenuates the invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, a cancer cell migration assay was performed. Interestingly, only 78.5% (n = 193) of the breast cancer tumors displayed detectable LOX expression. Nearly 60% (n = 120) of the cases fell into Group 1 (tumor &gt; normal, T &gt; N); in this group, the mean LOX expression in the tumor cells was 20.2-fold greater than in normal cells. However, in Group 2 (normal &gt; tumor, N &gt; T), the LOX expression level in most of the normal tissues examined (80%, 59/73) was less than fivefold greater than in the tumor tissues. The increased level of active LOX in the invasive breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 was accompanied by the increased phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase at Tyr-576 and of paxillin at Tyr-118. We also found that the addition of β-APN (300 μM) and magnolol (25 μM), synergistically inhibited the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells. In this article, we describe, for the first time, higher expression of a LOX protein in breast tumors compared with normal tissues from Asian patients. Moreover, the results indicate that the inhibition of LOX using magnolol may represent a more desirable strategy for breast cancer therapy than the use of β-APN.<newchar><newabs>23184641<newchar>Plasticity and reciprocity of breast cancer cells to various extracellular matrice (ECMs) are three-dimensionally analyzed in quantitative way in a novel and powerful microfluidic in vitro platform. This successfully demonstrates the metastatic potential of cancer cells and their effective strategies of ECM proteolytic remodeling and morphological change, while interacting with other cells and invading into heterogeneous ECMs.<newchar><newabs>19852957<newchar>We previously reported that lacrimal glands (LGs) of male non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, an established mouse model of autoimmune inflammatory LG disease that displays many features of human LGs in patients afflicted with Sjögren's syndrome (SjS), exhibit significant degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) structures as well as increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The purpose of the current study was to expand the spectrum of proteases identified, to clarify their probable origin as well as to identify the contribution of these changes to disease pathogenesis. We explored in depth the changes in ECM structures and ECM protease expression at the onset of disease (6 weeks) versus late stage disease (18 weeks) in male NOD mouse LGs, relative to LGs of age-matched male NODscid, a severely immunocompromised congenic strain, and healthy BALB/c mice. LG tissues were examined using routine histological, immunohistochemical, Western Blot and gene expression analyses novel multiphoton imaging technologies. We further characterized the profile of infiltrating immune cells under each condition using flow cytometry. Our results show that the initial infiltrating cells at 6 weeks of age are responsible for increased MMP and cathepsin H expression and therefore initiate the LG ECM degradation in NOD mice. More importantly, NODscid mice exhibited normal LG ECM structures, indicating the lymphocytes seen in the LGs of NOD mice are responsible for the degradation of the LG ECM. The disease-related remodeling of LG ECM structures may play a crucial role in altering the acinar signaling environment, disrupting the signaling scaffolds within the cells, which are required to mobilize the exocytotic trafficking machinery, ultimately leading to a loss of LG function in patients afflicted with SjS.<newchar><newabs>21896281<newchar>Combined proteomic and transcriptomic approaches to study the composition of the venom of Thalassophryne nattereri venomous fish revealed the primary structures of the major toxins as a family of proteases natterins, never described on venoms and a C-type lectin nattectin. To gain new insights into the mechanisms of venom pathogenesis and to further elucidate the role of its major toxins, the natterins and nattectin, we undertook in vitro investigations using these isolated toxins. Here we demonstrated the specific ability of the nattectin to bind types I and V collagen and natterins to bind and cleave type I collagen as well as type IV collagen, disrupting cell attachment and HeLa cells survival. Natterins have cytotoxic effect on both adherent cells or at in suspension, showing direct induction of necrosis that is followed by cell detachment. Nattectin improves integrin-mediated HeLa cell adhesion and resistance to apoptosis by its binding to RGD-dependent integrins, especially the β1 subunit. Based on our studies we now report that extracellular matrix (ECM) components as well as the integrin β1 subunit are targets for the natterins and nattectin. The ECM degradation or remodeling activities exerted by these toxins affect cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesion and survival and impair inflammatory cell migration into inflamed tissues.<newchar><newabs>22626649<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) in the central nervous system actively orchestrates and modulates changes in neural structure and function in response to experience, after injury, during disease, and with changes in neuronal activity. A component of the multi-protein, ECM aggregate in brain, the chondroitin sulfate (CS)-bearing proteoglycans (PGs) known as lecticans, inhibit neurite outgrowth, alter dendritic spine shape, elicit closure of critical period plasticity, and block target reinnervation and functional recovery after injury as the major component of a glial scar. While removal of the CS chains from lecticans with chondroitinase ABC improves plasticity, proteolytic cleavage of the lectican core protein may change the conformation of the matrix aggregate and also modulate neural plasticity. This review centers on the roles of the lecticans and the endogenous metalloproteinase families that proteolytically cleave lectican core proteins, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTSs), in neural plasticity. These extracellular metalloproteinases modulate structural neural plasticity-including changes in neurite outgrowth and dendritic spine remodeling-and synaptic plasticity. Some of these actions have been demonstrated to occur via cleavage of the PG core protein. Other actions of the proteases include cleavage of non-matrix substrate proteins, whereas still other actions may occur directly at the cell surface without proteolytic cleavage. The data convincingly demonstrate that metalloproteinases modulate physiological and pathophysiological neural plasticity.<newchar><newabs>19299573<newchar>We have previously shown that microgravity and simulated microgravity induce an increase in human and rat aortic stiffness. We attempted to elucidate the mechanism(s) responsible for this increase in stiffness. We hypothesize that an alteration in vessel wall collagen or elastin content or in extracellular matrix (ECM) cross-linking either individually or in a combination is responsible for the increased vessel stiffness. Rats underwent hindlimb unweighting (HLU) for a period of 7 days to simulate microgravity. The contribution of ECM cross-linking to the vessel wall stiffness was evaluated by measuring aortic pulse wave velocity following inhibition of the cross-linking enzymes lysyl oxidase (LOX) and transglutaminase (tTG) and the nonenzymatic advanced glycation end product cross-linking pathway during HLU. Aortic collagen and elastin content was quantified using established colorimetric assays. Collagen subtype composition was determined via immunofluorescent staining. The increase in aortic pulse wave velocity after HLU was significantly attenuated in the LOX and tTG inhibition groups compared with saline (1.13 +/- 0.11 vs. 3.00 +/- 0.15 m/s, LOX vs. saline, P &lt; 0.001; 1.16 +/- 0.25 vs. 3.00 +/- 0.15 m/s, tTG vs. saline, P &lt; 0.001). Hydroxyproline content, a measure of collagen content, was increased in all groups after HLU (2.01 +/- 0.62 vs. 3.69 +/- 0.68% dry weight, non-HLU vs. HLU, P = 0.009). Collagen subtype composition and aortic elastin content were not altered by HLU. Together, these data indicate that HLU-induced increases in aortic stiffness are due to both increased aortic collagen content and enzyme cross-linking activity.<newchar><newabs>23843616<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is a fundamental cell property that allows cells to alter their microenvironment and move through tissues. Invadopodia and podosomes are subcellular actin-rich structures that are specialized for matrix degradation and are formed by cancer and normal cells, respectively. Although initial studies focused on defining the core machinery of these two structures, recent studies have identified inputs from both growth factor and adhesion signaling as crucial for invasive activity. This Commentary will outline the current knowledge on the upstream signaling inputs to invadopodia and podosomes and their role in governing distinct stages of these invasive structures. We discuss invadopodia and podosomes as adhesion structures and highlight new data showing that invadopodia-associated adhesion rings promote the maturation of already-formed invadopodia. We present a model in which growth factor stimulation leads to phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity and formation of invadopodia, whereas adhesion signaling promotes exocytosis of proteinases at invadopodia.<newchar>Actin cytoskeleton<n-term>Adhesion<n-term>Growth factor<n-term>Invadopodia<n-term>PI3K<n-term>Podosome<n-term>phosphoinositide 3-kinase<n-term><newabs>21237573<newchar>SPARC (a secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) has a reputation for being potent anti-cancer and anti-obesity molecule. It is one of the first known matricellular protein that modulates interactions between cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) and is associated with the 'balance' of white adipose tissue (WAT) as well as lipogenesis and lipolysis during adipogenesis. Adipogenesis is an indication for the development of obesity and has been related to a wide variety of cancers including breast cancer, endometrial cancer, esophageal cancer, etc. Adipogenesis mainly involves ECM remodeling, changes in cell-ECM interactions, and cytoskeletal rearrangement. SPARC can also prevent hypertrophy of adipocytes and hyperplasia of adipocyte progenitors. In addition to SPARC's inhibitory role in adipogenesis, it has also been known to be involved in cell cycle, cell proliferation, cell invasion, adhesion, migration, angiogenesis and apoptosis. Molecular cancer biology and clinical biochemistry have significantly enhanced our understanding of the mechanisms that motivate the anti-cancer and anti-obesity action of SPARC. Recent studies elucidating the signaling pathways that are activated by SPARC can help develop the beneficial aspects of SPARC for cancer therapy and obesity prevention. This review focuses on the anti-cancer role of SPARC as it pertains to obesity.<newchar><newabs>23844232<newchar>Cells in the trabecular meshwork (TM), a tissue responsible for draining aqueous humor out of the eye, are known to be highly phagocytic. Phagocytic activity in TM cells is thought to play an important role in outflow pathway physiology. However, the molecular mechanisms triggered by phagocytosis in TM cells are unknown. Here we investigated the effects of chronic phagocytic stress on lysosomal function using different phagocytic ligands (E. coli, carboxylated beads, collagen I-coated beads, and pigment). Lysotracker red co-localization and electron micrographs showed the maturation of E. coli- and collagen I-coated beads-containing phagosomes into phagolysosomes. Maturation of phagosomes into phagolysosomes was not observed with carboxylated beads or pigment particles. In addition, phagocytosis of E. coli and collagen I-coated beads led to increased lysosomal mass, and the specific up-regulation and activity of cathepsin B (CTSB). Higher levels of membrane-bound and secreted CTSB were also detected. Moreover, in vivo zymography showed the intralysosomal degradation of ECM components associated with active CTSB, as well as an overall increased gelatinolytic activity in phagocytically challenged TM cells. This increased gelatinolytic activity with phagocytosis was partially blocked with an intracellular CTSB inhibitor. Altogether, these results suggest a potential role of phagocytosis in outflow pathway tissue homeostasis through the up-regulation and/or proteolytic activation of extracellular matrix remodeling genes.<newchar><newabs>21960174<newchar>Advances in donor matching and immunosuppressive therapies have decreased the prevalence of acute rejection of cardiac grafts; however, chronic rejection remains a significant obstacle for long-term allograft survival. While initiating elements of anti-allograft immune responses have been identified, the linkage between these factors and the ultimate development of cardiac fibrosis is not well understood. Tissue fibrosis resembles an exaggerated wound healing response, in which extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules are central. One such ECM molecule is an alternatively spliced isoform of the ubiquitous glycoprotein fibronectin (FN), termed extra domain A-containing cellular fibronectin (EDA cFN). EDA cFN is instrumental in fibrogenesis; thus, we hypothesized that it might also regulate fibrotic remodelling associated with chronic rejection. We compared the development of acute and chronic cardiac allograft rejection in EDA cFN-deficient (EDA(-/-)) and wild-type (WT) mice. While EDA(-/-) mice developed acute cardiac rejection in a manner indistinguishable from WT controls, cardiac allografts in EDA(-/-) mice were protected from fibrosis associated with chronic rejection. Decreased fibrosis was not associated with differences in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy or intra-graft expression of pro-fibrotic mediators. Further, we examined expression of EDA cFN and total FN by whole splenocytes under conditions promoting various T-helper lineages. Conditions supporting regulatory T-cell (Treg) development were characterized by greatest production of total FN and EDA cFN, though EDA cFN to total FN ratios were highest in Th1 cultures. These findings indicate that recipient-derived EDA cFN is dispensable for acute allograft rejection responses but that it promotes the development of fibrosis associated with chronic rejection. Further, conditions favouring the development of regulatory T cells, widely considered graft-protective, may drive production of ECM molecules which enhance deleterious remodelling responses. Thus, EDA cFN may be a therapeutic target for ameliorating fibrosis associated with chronic cardiac allograft rejection.<newchar><newabs>19355971<newchar>After injury the body normally undergoes a repair process, however when this event becomes deregulated the pathological condition of fibrosis occurs. There are many similarities with respect to the fundamental mechanisms that regulate sclerosis in different organ systems. In this review we utilize the pathological entity of glomerulosclerosis in the kidney to highlight some of the general paradigms whereby extracellular matrix (ECM) is deposited in greater quantities than it is degraded. Our review discusses how genetic and structural abnormalities of specific ECM components can result in fibrosis. In addition, we outline how some key growth factors, integrins and oxidative stress play a role in the development of glomerulosclerosis.<newchar><newabs>23628871<newchar>AAA is a complex disease that leads to a localized dilation of the infrarenal aorta that develops over years. Longitudinal information in humans has been difficult to obtain for this disease, therefore mouse models have become increasingly used to study the development of AAAs. The objective of this study was to determine any changes that occur in the biomechanical response and fiber microstructure in the ApoE(-/-) AngII mouse model of aneurysm during disease progression. Adult ApoE(-/-) AngII infused mice along with wild-type controls were taken at 14 and 28 d. Aortas were excised and tested simultaneously for biaxial mechanical response and ECM organization. Data sets were fit to a Fung-type constitutive model to give peak strains and stiffness values. Images from two photon microscopy were quantified in order to assess the preferred fiber alignment and degree of fiber orientation. Biomechanical results found significant differences that were present at 14 d had returned to normal by 28 d along with significant changes in fiber orientation and dispersion indicating remodeling occurring within the aneurysmal wall. This return of some of the normal biomechanical function, in addition the continuing changes that occur in the microstructure suggest a restorative response that occurs in the ApoE(-/-) AngII infused model after the initial aneurysm formation.<newchar>AAA<n-term>AngII<n-term>ApoE<n-term>aneurysm<n-term>mechanical<n-term>microstructure<n-term>mouse model<n-term>two-photon<n-term><newabs>18508558<newchar>Hyaluronan and versican are extracellular matrix (ECM) macromolecules that are present in low amounts in normal blood vessels, but increase dramatically in vascular disease. These ECM components are particularly enriched in intimal hyperplasia as seen in human restenotic lesions following balloon angioplasty and provide a permissive environment for arterial smooth muscle cell (ASMC) proliferation, migration, and macrophage adhesion. Interference with the association of hyaluronan and versican with the surface of ASMCs, either through short oliogosaccharides of hyaluronan or blocking antibodies to the hyaluronan receptor, CD44, blocks the proliferative and migratory response of these cells to growth factors, such as platelet derived growth factor (PDGF). Agents that interfere with the proliferative response of ASMCs and that are used in the treatment of restenosis, such as rapamycin, inhibit the synthesis of hyaluronan by these cells. Inhibition of versican by versican antisense blocks proliferation of SMCs. The synthesis of hyaluronan and versican is highly regulated and influenced by pro-inflammatory growth factors such as PDGF and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta).<newchar><newabs>15648161<newchar>Tubulointerstitial fibrosis (TIF) is thought now to be a key factor in progression of renal failure in chronic nephropathies. A similar pattern of changes in glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis suggests common mechanisms operating in progression of renal failure in these nephropathies. Of importance in the process of interstitial inflammation is activation of the nuclear factor of transcription (NFkB) in tubular cells due to components of proteinuria and their secretion of some proinflammatory mediators, first of all chemokines with formation of inflammatory infiltrate and accumulation of interstitial myofibroblasts--the main source of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Our findings are of interest in the light of current ideas that among ECM components the number of fibronectin deposites most of all reflects the severity of structural renal tissue damage including TIF and correlates with severity of renal failure.<newchar><newabs>21437600<newchar>Adult cardiomyocytes are terminally differentiated with minimal replicative capacity. Therefore, long-term preservation or enhancement of cardiac function depends on structural adaptation. Myocytes interact with the extracellular matrix, fibroblasts, and vascular cells and with each other (end to end; side to side). We review the current understanding of the mechanical determinants and environmental sensing systems that modulate and regulate myocyte molecular machinery and its structural organization. We feature the design and application of engineered cellular microenvironments to demonstrate the ability of cardiac cells to remodel their cytoskeletal organization and shape, including sarcomere/myofibrillar architectural topography. Cell shape-dependent functions result from complex mechanical interactions between the cytoskeleton architecture and external conditions, be they cell-cell or cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion contact-mediated. This mechanobiological perspective forms the basis for viewing the cardiomyocyte as a mechanostructural anisotropic continuum, exhibiting constant mechanosensory-driven self-regulated adjustment of the cytoskeleton through tight interplay between its force generation activity and concurrent cytoarchitectural remodeling. The unifying framework guiding this perspective is the observation that these emerging events and properties are initiated by and respond to cytoskeletal reorganization, regulated by cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesion and its corresponding (mutually interactive) signaling machinery. It is important for future studies to elucidate how cross talk between these mechanical signals is coordinated to control myocyte structure and function. Ultimately, understanding how the highly interactive mechanical signaling can give rise to phenotypic changes is critical for targeting the underlying pathways that contribute to cardiac remodeling associated with various forms of dilated and hypertrophic myopathies, myocardial infarction, heart failure, and reverse remodeling.<newchar><newabs>23885345<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are involved in the development of tendinopathy. These potent enzymes completely degrade all components of the connective tissue, modify the extracellular matrix (ECM), and mediate the development of painful tendinopathy. To control the local activity of activated proteinases, the same cells produce tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP). These latter bind to the enzyme and prevent degradation. The balance between the activities of MMPs and TIMPs regulates tendon remodeling, whereas an imbalance produces a collagen dis-regulation and disturbances in tendons. ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) are cell membrane-linked enzymes with proteolytic and cell signaling functions. ADAMTSs (ADAM with thrombospondin motifs) are secreted into the circulation and constitute a heterogenous family of proteases with both anabolic and catabolic functions. Further studies are needed to better define the mechanism of action, and whether these new strategies are safe and effective in larger models.<newchar>metalloproteases<n-term>tendinopathy<n-term>tendon healing<n-term><newabs>23885344<newchar>We studied the effect of spasticity-induced overload on tendons from the gracilis and semitendinosus muscles from cerebral palsy (CP) and healthy subjects (CT) stained with haematoxylineosin, Sirius red and Alcian blue. Vascularity was also characterized using an anti-CD34 antibody. Light microscopy analysis of haematoxylin-eosin stained sections revealed that the overall structure of tendons was maintained, characterized by parallel and slightly wavy collagen fibers in both CT and CP tendons. However, hypercellularity, cell rounding, increased vascularity and lipoid degeneration were observed in CP samples. Sirius red stained collagen fibers were more evident in CP tendons, suggesting an increased collagen content induced by spasticity. Alcian blue staining revealed an overall increase of glycosaminoglycans in CP tendons as observed in tendinopathy. Our results suggest that CP-induced spasticity may be considered as a chronic, persisting and repetitive loading of tendons, inducing ECM remodeling as adaptive response to increased functional demand. At the same time, the evidence of some tendinopathic-like markers in CP tendons suggests that the chronic nature of the CP condition could represent a pathologic condition, possibly leading to a transient weakness of the tissue making it more susceptible to damage from cumulative loading until an overt tendinopathy develops.<newchar>collagen<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>glycosaminoglycans<n-term>spasticity<n-term>tendon<n-term><newabs>18978301<newchar>Defective epithelial repair in the setting of chronic lung disease has been suggested to contribute to uncontrolled extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and development of fibrosis. We sought to directly test this hypothesis through gene expression profiling of total lung RNA isolated from mouse models of selective epithelial cell injury that are associated with either productive or abortive repair. Analysis of gene expression in repairing lungs of naphthalene-exposed mice revealed prominent clusters of up-regulated genes with putative roles in regulation of the extracellular matrix and cellular proliferation. Further analysis of tenascin C (Tnc), a representative matrix protein, in total lung RNA revealed a transient 4.5-fold increase in mRNA abundance 1 day after injury and a return to steady-state levels by Recovery Day 3. Tnc was deposited by the peribronchiolar mesenchyme immediately after injury and was remodeled to basement membrane subtending the bronchiolar epithelium during epithelial repair. Epithelial restitution was accompanied by a decrease in Tnc mRNA and protein expression to steady-state levels. In contrast, abortive repair using a transgenic model allowing ablation of all reparative cells led to a progressive increase in Tnc mRNA within lung tissue and accumulation of its gene product within the subepithelial mesenchyme of both conducting airways and alveoli. These data demonstrate that the ECM is dynamically remodeled in response to selective epithelial cell injury and that this process is activated without resolution in the setting of defective airway epithelial repair.<newchar><newabs>22291969<newchar>Invasion of the trophoblast into the maternal decidua is regulated by both the trophoectoderm and the endometrial stroma, and entails the action of tissue remodeling enzymes. Trophoblast invasion requires the action of metalloproteinases (MMPs) to degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and in turn, decidual cells express tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs). The balance between these promoting and restraining factors is a key event for the successful outcome of pregnancy. Gene expression is post-transcriptionally regulated by histone deacetylases (HDACs) that unpacks condensed chromatin activating gene expression. In this study we analyze the effect of histone acetylation on the expression of tissue remodeling enzymes and activity of human endometrial stromal cells (hESCs) related to trophoblast invasion control. Treatment of hESCs with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) increased the expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 while decreased MMP-2, MMP-9 and uPA and have an inhibitory effect on trophoblast invasion. Moreover, histone acetylation is detected at the promoters of TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 genes in TSA-treated. In addition, in an in vitro decidualized hESCs model, the increase of TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 expression is associated with histone acetylation at the promoters of these genes. Our results demonstrate that histone acetylation disrupt the balance of ECM modulators provoking a restrain of trophoblast invasion. These findings are important as an epigenetic mechanism that can be used to control trophoblast invasion.<newchar><newabs>21421827<newchar>Left ventricular (LV) volume overload (VO) causes eccentric remodeling with inflammatory cell infiltration and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, for which there is currently no proven therapy. To uncover new pathways that connect inflammation and ECM homeostasis with cellular dysfunction, we determined the cardiac transciptome in subacute, compensated, and decompensated stages based on in vivo hemodynamics and echocardiography in the rat with aortocaval fistula (ACF). LV dilatation at 5 wk was associated with a normal LV end-diastolic dimension-to-posterior wall thickness ratio (LVEDD/PWT; compensated), whereas the early 2-wk (subacute) and late 15-wk (decompensated) ACF groups had significant increases in LVEDD/PWT. Subacute and decompensated stages had a significant upregulation of genes related to inflammation, the ECM, the cell cycle, and apoptosis. These changes were accompanied by neutrophil and macrophage infiltration, nonmyocyte apoptosis, and interstitial collagen loss. At 15 wk, there was a 40-fold increase in the matricellular protein periostin, which inhibits connections between collagen and cells, thereby potentially mediating a side-to-side slippage of cardiomyocytes and LV dilatation. The majority of downregulated genes was composed of mitochondrial enzymes whose suppression progressed from 5 to 15 wk concomitant with LV dilatation and systolic heart failure. The profound decrease in gene expression related to fatty acid, amino acid, and glucose metabolism was associated with the downregulation of peroxisome proliferator associated receptor (PPAR)-α-related and bioenergetic-related genes at 15 wk. In VO, an early phase of inflammation subsides at 5 wk but reappears at 15 wk with marked periostin production along with the suppression of genes related to PPAR-α and energy metabolism.<newchar><newabs>22576800<newchar>Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive epithelial malignancy. It is known to be the most common neoplasm appearing in the upper aerodigestive tract. The poor 5‑year survival rate has remained unchanged in the last decades even though improved techniques in surgery, radiation and chemotherapy have been established. In contrast to the overall decreasing incidence of head and neck cancer in the US, the incidence of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer is increasing, indicating the importance of viral etiology. Furthermore, growth and invasion of HNSCC are strongly influenced by the extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) have been shown to play key roles in the remodeling of the ECM. Imatinib (STI 571) was originally designed to inhibit the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukaemia. But it also has an inhibitory impact, e.g., on the protein-tyrosine-kinase (PTK) receptor c-kit and on its PTK activity in HNSCC. In this study, we incubated the HNSCC cell lines HNSCC 11A and 14C and the p16-positive SCC line CERV196 with increasing concentrations of imatinib or carboplatin. After an incubation time of up to 10 days, we evaluated MMP-2 and -14 expression by ELISA techniques and immunohistochemistry. MMP-2 and -14 expression was demonstrated in all incubated tumor cell lines. Especially incubation with imatinib resulted in a significant decrease in MMP expression in incubated cell lines. Our results indicate that the expression of MMP-2 and -14 is suppressed in the presence of imatinib. Thus, imatinib may exert in part its inhibitory effect on malignant cell growth via the blockage of the signal transduction of PTK receptors. Further studies are warranted, especially keeping in mind the moderate toxicity of imatinib.<newchar><newabs>21532628<newchar>We have studied the effects of carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1) on tumor angiogenesis in murine ductal mammary adenocarcinomas. We crossed transgenic mice with whey acidic protein promoter-driven large T-antigen expression (WAP-T mice) with oncogene-induced mammary carcinogenesis with CEACAM1null mice, and with Tie2-Ceacam1 transgenics, in which the Tie2 promoter drives endothelial overexpression of CEACAM1 (WAP-T × CEACAM1(endo+) mice), and analyzed tumor vascularization, angiogenesis and vessel maturation in these mice. Using flat-panel volume computed tomography (fpVCT) and histology, we found that WAP-T × CEACAM1(endo+) mice exhibited enhanced tumoral vascularization owing to CEACAM1(+) vessels in the tumor periphery, and increased intratumoral angiogenesis compared with controls. In contrast, vascularization of CEACAM1null/WAP-T-derived tumors was poor, and tumor vessels were dilated, leaky and showed poor pericyte coverage. Consequently, the tumoral vasculature could not be visualized in CEACAM1null/WAP-T mice by fpVCT, and we observed poor organization of the perivascular extracellular matrix (ECM), accompanied by the accumulation of collagen IV-degrading matrix metalloproteinase 9(+) (MMP9(+)) leukocytes and stromal cells. Vascular instability and alterations in ECM structure were accompanied by a significant increase in pulmonary metastases in CEACAM1null/WAP-T mice, whereas only occasional metastases were observed in CEACAM1(+) hosts. In CEACAM1(+) hosts, intratumoral vessels did not express CEACAM1, but they were intact, extensively covered with pericytes and framed by a well-organized perivascular ECM. MMP9(+) accessory cells were largely absent. Orthotopic transplantation of primary WAP-T- and CEACAM1null/WAP-T tumors into all three mouse lines confirmed that a CEACAM1(+) host environment is a prerequisite for productive angiogenic remodeling of the tumor microenvironment. Hence, CEACAM1 expression in the tumor periphery determines the vascular phenotype in a tumor, whereas systemic absence of CEACAM1 interferes with the formation of an organized tumor matrix and intratumoral vessel maturation.<newchar><newabs>17710425<newchar>With aging and cancer there is increased expression or activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that degrade and remodel the structural extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, exposure of skin to ultraviolet (UV) radiation (photoaging) leads to loss of cell viability, membrane damage, and deposition of excessive elastotic material. Lutein has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, photoprotective, and anti-carcinogenic properties. The goal of this research was to investigate lutein's anti-aging and anti-carcinogenic effects via the regulation of the extracellular matrix remodeling. To this purpose, the effects of lutein on the expression of MMPs and their inhibitors (TIMPs, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases) in dermal fibroblasts (intrinsic aging) and melanoma cells were examined. Further, for lutein's photoprotective effects, the regulation of cell viability, membrane integrity, and elastin expression in the non-irradiated, and UVA or UVB radiation exposed fibroblasts were analyzed. Lutein significantly inhibited MMP-1 expression, transcriptionally, and MMP-2 protein levels in dermal fibroblasts, without altering TIMPs expression. It significantly inhibited MMP-1 expression in melanoma cells while stimulating TIMP-2. Lutein did not alter fibroblast or melanoma cell viability or membrane integrity. In ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts, lutein improved cell viability, membrane integrity and inhibited elastin expression, though more significantly in the UVB exposed fibroblasts. In summary, the mechanism to lutein's anti-aging and anti-carcinogenic effects include the inhibition of MMP to TIMP ratio in dermal fibroblasts and melanoma cells, and the inhibition of cell loss, membrane damage and elastin expression in ultraviolet radiation exposed fibroblasts.<newchar><newabs>19248806<newchar>Like the other oxidation products of the lipid moiety of plasma low density lipoproteins (LDL), cholesterol oxidation products are consistently found within the characteristic lesions of atherosclerosis, both in experimental animals and in man. A growing bulk of evidence suggests that oxysterols make a significant contribution to the vascular remodeling that occurs in atherosclerosis, being involved in various key steps of this complex process: endothelial cell dysfunction, adhesion of circulating blood cells, foam cell and fibrous cap formation, modulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), vascular cell apoptosis and plaque's instability. Moreover, oxysterols have been demonstrated to be at least one or two orders of magnitude more reactive than unoxidized cholesterol in exerting pro-inflammatory, pro-apoptotic, and pro-fibrogenic effects. Thus, a pathological level of cholesterol oxidation in the vasculature may be the missing molecular link between hypercholesterolemia and the formation of atherosclerotic lesions.<newchar><newabs>16442271<newchar>We previously demonstrated the involvement of the dystrophin-dystroglycan (Dys-DG) complex in the stabilization of intraganglionic synapses in rodent superior cervical ganglion (SCG) by investigating changes in the organization of their post-synaptic apparatus induced either by ganglionic neuron axotomy or by the lack of Dys in genetically dystrophic mdx mice, or by the combination of the two. A role of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the degradation of DG and, hence, in disrupting the connection between the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the cortical cytoskeleton, has recently been proposed. We hypothesized that the degradation by MMPs of ECM proteins and DG in ganglionic neurons may be involved in injury-induced synaptic detachment observed in rodent SCG. In this review, we report changes in MMP-2 and in the proteins involved in one of the enzymatic cascades of activation induced by axotomy of rat SCG neurons. This will be preceded by a description of our previous observations that led to investigate the role of MMP-2 in this experimental model.<newchar><newabs>22201975<newchar>Fibrosis is an abnormal fibroblast-activation-associated pathological manifestation in injured organs where excessive non-physiological synthesis and accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins by activated/differentiated fibroblasts disrupts tissue homeostasis. Like other eukaryotic genes, expression of ECM protein genes not only depends on its gene sequences in the regulatory region but also influenced by non-genetic factors called epigenetic regulators including acetyltransferases, deacetylases, methyltransferases and microRNAs. The acetyltransferase p300 (ATp300), a transcriptional coactivator, is a major player in the epigenetic regulation of genes whose products are involved in cellular growth, proliferation, apoptosis and essential for embryonic development. ATp300 acetylates specific lysine residues in histones and transcription factors (KAT) and as a transcriptional coactivator it forms a bridge between upstream regulatory element binding protein complex and basal transcriptional machinery. Abnormal coactivator activity-associated diseases are known as coactivator diseases. Abnormalities in ATp300 activities in adults are associated with numerous diseases. Here, we review the significant roles of ATp300 in epigenetic regulation of collagen synthesis and deposition in extracellular spaces, matrix remodeling and tissue fibrogenesis. The present day understanding on the distinct role of acetyltransferases, deacetylases, and deacetylase inhibitors on epigenetic regulation of matrix remodeling and fibrosis has also been discussed.<newchar><newabs>16990566<newchar>Tenascin-C (TN-C) is an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein expressed within remodeling systemic and pulmonary arteries (PAs), where it supports vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation. Previously, we showed that A10 SMCs cultivated on native type I collagen possess a spindle-shaped morphology and do not express TN-C, whereas those on denatured collagen possess a well-defined F-actin stress fiber network, a spread morphology, and they do express TN-C. To determine whether changes in cytoskeletal architecture control TN-C, SMCs on denatured collagen were treated with cytochalasin D, which decreased SMC spreading and activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), signaling effectors required for TN-C transcription. Next, to determine whether cell shape, dictated by the F-actin cytoskeleton, regulates TN-C, different geometries of SMCs (ranging from spread to round) were engineered on denatured collagen: as SMCs progressively rounded, ERK1/2 activity and TN-C transcription declined. Because RhoA and Rho kinase (ROCK) regulate cell morphology by controlling cytoskeletal architecture, we reasoned that these factors might also regulate TN-C. Indeed, SMCs on denatured collagen possessed higher levels of RhoA activity than those on native collagen, and blocking RhoA or ROCK activities attenuated SMC spreading, ERK1/2 activity, and TN-C expression in SMCs on denatured collagen. Thus, ROCK controls the configuration of the F-actin cytoskeleton and SMC shape in a manner that is permissive for ERK1/2-dependent production of TN-C. Finally, we showed that inhibition of ROCK activity suppresses SMC TN-C expression and disease progression in hypertensive rat PAs. Thus, in addition to its role in regulating vasoconstriction, ROCK also controls matrix production.<newchar><newabs>22824096<newchar>Pulmonary fibrosis is a chronic lung disease characterized by excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and remodeling of the lung architecture. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is considered the most common and severe form of the disease, with a median survival of approximately three years and no proven effective therapy. Despite the fact that effective treatments are absent and the precise mechanisms that drive fibrosis in most patients remain incompletely understood, an extensive body of scientific literature regarding pulmonary fibrosis has accumulated over the past 35 years. In this review, we discuss three broad areas which have been explored that may be responsible for the combination of altered lung fibroblasts, loss of alveolar epithelial cells, and excessive accumulation of ECM: inflammation and immune mechanisms, oxidative stress and oxidative signaling, and procoagulant mechanisms. We discuss each of these processes separately to facilitate clarity, but certainly significant interplay will occur amongst these pathways in patients with this disease.<newchar><newabs>22441882<newchar>Treatment during early tumor development has greater success because tissue growth remains largely confined to its original locus. At later stages, malignant cells migrate from their original location, invade surrounding normal areas, and can disseminate widely throughout the body. Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) serves as a key facilitator of this dissemination. Proteolytic enzymes including plasmin and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an integral role in degrading the surrounding ECM proteins and clearing a path for tumor cell migration. Specific MMPs are highly expressed late during malignant tumor invasion. It is not understood whether early changes in MMPs influence apoptotic and necrotic cell death, processes known to govern the early stages of carcinogenesis. Similarly, the interaction between MDM2 and p53 is tightly controlled by a complex array of post-translational modifications, which in turn dictates the stability and activity of both p53 and MDM2. The present studies examine the hypothesis that model hepatotoxin dimethylnitrosamine (DMN), which is also a model carcinogen, will induce the MMP family of proteins after administration in hepatotoxic doses. Doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg/kg DMN were administered i.p. to male C3H mice. Changes in parameters associated with apoptotic and necrotic cell death, DNA damage, cell proliferation, and extracellular proteinases were examined in liver at 24 h. Serum ALT activity, oxidative stress [malondialdehyde], and caspase-activated DNAse mediated DNA laddering increased in a dose-dependent manner, as did the level of MDM2 protein. MMP-9, -10 and -12 (gelatinase-B, stromelysin-2, macrophage elastase), and p53 protein levels increased following 25 mg/kg DMN, but were successively decreased after higher DMN doses. The results of this study demonstrate changes in MDM2 and MMPs during DMN-induced acute liver injury and provide a plausible linkage between DMN-induced oxidative stress-mediated genomic injury and its likely involvement in setting the stage for initiating subsequent metastatic disease at later circumstances.<newchar><newabs>17335434<newchar>Several matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are induced by thyroid hormone (TH) during the climax of amphibian metamorphosis and play a pivotal role in the remodeling of the intestine and the regressing tail and gills by degrading the extracellular matrix (ECM). We compared MMP gene expression levels precisely by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The expression of MMP genes increases prominently at Nieuwkoop and Faber (NF) stages 60, 60-61 and 62 in the intestine, gills and tail, respectively, when the drastic morphological changes start in each organ. Gene expression analysis in the TH-treated tadpoles and cell line revealed that MMP mRNAs are upregulated in response to TH quickly within several hours to low levels and then increase in a day to high levels. All TH-induced MMP genes have TH response elements (TREs). The presence of high affinity TREs in MMP genes correlates with early TH-induction. Based on these results, we propose that TH stimulates the transcription of MMP genes through TREs within several hours to low levels and then brings about the main increase of mRNAs by TH-induced transcriptional factors, including TH receptor beta, in a cell type-specific transcriptional environment.<newchar><newabs>12459174<newchar>Endothelin-1 (ET) is known to stimulate mesangial cell (MC) proliferation, extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis, and thereby contribute to the progression of glomerulonephritis (GN). To clarify the molecular and cellular mechanisms of how ET is involved in the development of glomerular sclerosis, we investigated the influence of ET on the MC-alpha1beta1 integrin-mediated collagen matrix reorganization using a collagen gel contraction assay. ET enhanced MC-alpha1beta1 integrin-mediated gel contraction in a dose-dependent manner. Addition of the endothelin A (ETA) receptor antagonist, BQ123, into collagen gels abolished ET-induced gel contraction by MC. Cell behavior involved in ET-induced gel contraction was investigated in combination with function-blocking anti-alpha1-integrin antibody. Migration and adhesion assays revealed that ET stimulated alpha1beta1 integrin-mediated MC migration but did not influence cell adhesion to type I collagen (collagen I). Integrin-function blocking studies using anti-alpha1 integrin antibody indicated that MC-alpha1beta1 integrin is required not only for collagen-dependent migration, but also for gel contraction. Zymography showed that ET increased MC matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity in a dose-dependent manner during MC-induced gel contraction process. Finally, flow cytometry analysis indicated that ET did not affect the cell surface expression of the MC-alpha1beta1 integrin within the collagen gel. These data suggested that ET promotes collagen matrix reorganization through the enhancement of MC-alpha1beta1 integrin-dependent migration and MMP-2 activity. We therefore conclude that ET is a potential molecule inducing pathological collagen matrix remodeling observed in progressive GN.<newchar><newabs>23314298<newchar>Wound healing in the pediatric patient is of utmost clinical and social importance because hypertrophic scarring can have aesthetic and psychological sequelae, from early childhood to late adolescence. Wound healing is a well-orchestrated reparative response affecting the damaged tissue at the cellular, tissue, organ, and system scales. Although tremendous progress has been made toward understanding wound healing at the individual temporal and spatial scales, its effects across the scales remain severely understudied and poorly understood. Here, we discuss the critical need for systems-based computational modeling of wound healing across the scales, from short-term to long-term and from small to large. We illustrate the state of the art in systems modeling by means of three key signaling mechanisms: oxygen tension-regulating angiogenesis and revascularization; transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) kinetics controlling collagen deposition; and mechanical stretch stimulating cellular mitosis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The complex network of biochemical and biomechanical signaling mechanisms and the multiscale character of the healing process make systems modeling an integral tool in exploring personalized strategies for wound repair. A better mechanistic understanding of wound healing in the pediatric patient could open new avenues in treating children with skin disorders such as birth defects, skin cancer, wounds, and burn injuries.<newchar><newabs>19106202<newchar>Controversy still exists regarding the involvement of relaxin (RLX) in cervical reorganization throughout parturition in the human, despite its well-known role in facilitating extensive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in diverse organs. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to examine the influence of RLX and estrogen (E2) on the cervical tissue of the common marmoset monkey. Two experimental designs were used: 1) in vivo analysis of the intracervical diameter under locally applied RLX and 2) ovariectomized (ov) marmosets were treated systemically with either recombinant human (rh) RLX, E2 or rhRLX+E2 to examine their action on the cervix. In vivo-locally applied rhRLX induced a distinct and significant widening of the cervix (before: 4.8+/-1.1 mm versus after: 5.7+/-0.9 mm in diameter; P&lt;0.030, MV+/-S.E.M.). This widening effect was most pronounced in animals without previous pregnancies. In vitro investigation of cervical tissue showed significantly increased wet weights after all three hormone treatments (E2: 0.27+/-0.07 g, RLX: 0.25+/-0.04 g, E2+RLX: 0.30+/-0.11 g; all P&lt;0.05; MV+/-S.E.M.) versus controls (0.10+/-0.04 g). Furthermore, morphological changes such as loosening of the connective tissue structure and decline in collagen content, an increase in the number of eosinophils, increased the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP1) and MMP2, as well as gene and protein expression of the RLX receptor RXFP1 could be detected in the cervical tissue after all hormone treatments, compared with controls. In summary, RLX has a potent widening effect on the cervix of the common marmoset monkey. Although E2 is not required for this RLX effect, a combined application of E2 and RLX induced the most prominent cervical ripening.<newchar><newabs>21292002<newchar>Investigations into the molecular mechanisms of, and cellular signaling pathways modulating ECM remodeling are especially challenging due to the complex post-translational regulation of the primary effectors of ECM catabolism - the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Recently a variety of approaches to the detection of MMP activity have been developed, and the prospect of visualizing ECM remodeling activity in living tissues is now opening exciting avenues of research for matrix biologists. In particular the use of FRET-quenched MMP substrates, which generate a fluorescent signal upon hydrolysis, is becoming increasingly popular, especially because linkers with defined and/or restricted proteolytic sensitivity can be used to bind fluorophore-quencher pairs, making these probes useful in characterizing the activity of specific proteases. We have taken advantage of the transparency and amenability to reverse genetics of the zebrafish embryo, in combination with these fluorogenic MMP substrates, to develop a multiplex in vivo assay for MMP activity that we dub &quot;differential in vivo zymography.&quot;<newchar><newabs>18652541<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix (ECM) are utilized in numerous regenerative medicine applications to facilitate the constructive remodeling of tissues and organs. The mechanisms by which the host remodeling response occurs are not fully understood, but recent studies suggest that both constituent growth factors and biologically active degradation products derived from ECM play important roles. The objective of the present study was to determine if degradation of ECM scaffold materials in vitro by methods that are biochemically and physiologically relevant can yield products that possess chemotactic and/or mitogenic activities for fully differentiated mammalian endothelial cells and undifferentiated multipotential progenitor cells. ECM harvested from porcine urinary bladder was degraded enzymatically with pepsin/hydrochloric acid or papain. The ECM degradation products were tested for chemoattractant properties utilizing either 48-well chemotaxis filter migration microchambers or fluorescence-based filter migration assays, and were tested for mitogenic properties in cell proliferation assays. Results showed that ECM degradation products possessed chemotactic and mitogenic activities for multipotential progenitor cells and that the same degradation products inhibited both chemotaxis and proliferation of differentiated endothelial cells. These findings support the concept that degradation products of ECM bioscaffolds are important modulators of the recruitment and proliferation of appropriate cell types during the process of ECM scaffold remodeling.<newchar><newabs>19831488<newchar>The urinary bladder wall (UBW), which is composed of smooth muscle, collagen, and elastin, undergoes profound remodeling in response to changes in mechanical loading resulting from various pathologies. In our laboratory, we have observed the production of fibrillar elastin in the extracellular matrix (ECM), which makes the UBW a particularly attractive tissue to investigate smooth muscle tissue remodeling. In the present study, we explored the mechanical role that de novo elastin fibers play in altering UBW ECM mechanical behavior using a structural constitutive modeling approach. The mechanical behavior of the collagen fiber component of the UBW ECM was determined from the biaxial stress-stretch response of normal UBW ECM, based on bimodal fiber recruitment that was motivated by the UBW's unique collagen fiber structure. The resulting fiber ensemble model was then combined with an experimentally derived fiber angular distribution to predict the biaxial mechanical behavior of normal and the elastin-rich UBW ECM to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of elastin production. Results indicated that UBW ECM exhibited a distinct structure with highly coiled collagen fiber bundles and visible elastic fibers in the pathological situation. Elastin-rich UBW ECM had a distinct mechanical behavior with higher compliance, attributable to the indirect effect of elastin fibers contracting the collagen fiber network, resulting in a retracted unloaded reference state of the tissue. In conclusion, our results suggest that the urinary bladder responds to prolonged periods of high strain by increasing its effective compliance through the interaction between collagen and de novo synthesized elastic fibers.<newchar><newabs>21941547<newchar>Physiological as well as pathological blood vessel formation are fundamentally dependent on cell-matrix interaction. Integrins, a family of major cell adhesion receptors, play a pivotal role in development, maintenance, and remodeling of the vasculature. Cell migration, invasion, and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are integrin-regulated processes, and the expression of certain integrins also correlates with tumor progression. Recent advances in the understanding of how integrins are involved in the regulation of blood vessel formation and remodeling during tumor progression are highlighted. The increasing knowledge of integrin function at the molecular level, together with the growing repertoire of integrin inhibitors which allow their selective pharmacological manipulation, makes integrins suited as potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>19075987<newchar>Asthma is a chronic airway disorder principally characterized by bronchial hyperreactivity and airflow obstruction. Increased epithelial and smooth muscle thickness, goblet cell hyperplasia, increased mucus secretion, abnormal deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in the basement membrane (BM) layer and angiogenesis are all events which occur in asthma and are defined with the general term of remodeling. This is an important feature whose repetition and regeneration may bring to an abnormal or exaggerated response to airway insults. One of the characteristic aspects of asthma is an alteration in structural cell function. Airway smooth muscle cells (ASM), myofibroblasts and fibroblasts have the ability to secrete immunomodulatory cytokines and chemokines and to express cell surface receptors. These elements are all important for cell adhesion and leukocyte activation and may be integral components of the inflammatory response as well. In particular cells such as fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, important regulators in the development and maintenance of allergic airway inflammation, have been studied in depth by our group and several studies regarding their role in asthma therapy have been analyzed.<newchar><newabs>17928541<newchar>Communication between cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) is critical for regulation of cell growth, survival, migration, and differentiation. Remodeling of the ECM can occur under normal physiological conditions, as a result of tissue injury, and in certain pathological conditions. ECM remodeling leads to alterations in ECM composition and organization that can alter many aspects of cell behavior, including cell migration. The cell migratory response varies depending on the type, amount, and organization of ECM molecules present, as well as the integrin and proteoglycan repertoire of the cells. We and others have shown that the deposition of several ECM molecules, including collagen types I and III, depends on the presence and stability of ECM fibronectin. Hence, the effect of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix on cell function may partially depend on its ability to direct the deposition of collagen in the ECM. In this study, we used collagen-binding fibronectin mutants and recombinant peptides that interfere with fibronectin-collagen binding to show that fibronectin-dependent collagen I deposition regulates the cell migratory response to fibronectin. These data show that the ability of fibronectin to organize other proteins in the ECM is an important aspect of fibronectin function and highlight the importance of understanding how interactions between ECM proteins influence cell behavior.<newchar><newabs>20619343<newchar>The proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1) elicits catabolic effects on the myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) early after myocardial infarction but there is little understanding of its direct effects on cardiac myofibroblasts (CMF), or the role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). We used a focused RT-PCR microarray to investigate the effects of IL-1α on expression of 41 ECM genes in CMF cultured from different patients, and explored regulation by p38 MAPK. IL-1α (10 ng/ml, 6h) had minimal effect on mRNA expression of structural ECM proteins, including collagens, laminins, fibronectin and vitronectin. However, it induced marked increases in expression of specific ECM proteases, including matrix metalloproteinases MMP-1 (collagenase-1), MMP-3 (stromelysin-1), MMP-9 (gelatinase-B) and MMP-10 (stromelysin-2). Conversely, IL-1α reduced mRNA and protein expression of ADAMTS1, a metalloproteinase that suppresses neovascularization. IL-1α increased expression of TIMP-1 slightly, but not TIMP-2. Data for MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-9, MMP-10 and ADAMTS1 were confirmed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα), another important myocardial proinflammatory cytokine, did not alter expression of these metalloproteinases. IL-1α strongly activated the p38 MAPK pathway in human CMF. Pharmacological inhibitors of p38-α/β (SB203580) or p38-α/β/γ/δ (BIRB-0796) reduced MMP-3 and ADAMTS1 mRNA expression, but neither inhibitor affected MMP-9 levels. MMP-1 and MMP-10 expression were inhibited by BIRB-0796 but not SB203580, suggesting roles for p38-γ/δ. In summary, IL-1α induces a distinct pattern of ECM protein and protease expression in human CMF, in part regulated by distinct p38 MAPK subtypes, affirming the key role of IL-1α and CMF in post-infarction cardiac remodeling.<newchar><newabs>21840960<newchar>In acute and chronic lung disease, widespread disruption of tissue architecture underlies compromised pulmonary function. Pulmonary fibroblasts have been implicated as critical effectors of tissue-destructive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by mobilizing a spectrum of proteolytic enzymes. Although efforts to date have focused on the catabolism of type I collagen, the predominant component of the lung interstitial matrix, the key collagenolytic enzymes employed by pulmonary fibroblasts remain unidentified. Herein, membrane type-1 matrix metalloprotease (MT1-MMP) is identified as the dominant and direct-acting protease responsible for the type I collagenolytic activity mediated by both mouse and human pulmonary fibroblasts. Furthermore, MT1-MMP is shown to be essential for pulmonary fibroblast migration within three-dimensional (3-D) hydrogels of cross-linked type I collagen that recapitulate ECM barriers encountered in the in vivo environment. Together, these findings demonstrate that MT1-MMP serves as a key effector of type I collagenolytic activity in pulmonary fibroblasts and earmark this pericellular collagenase as a potential target for therapeutic intervention.<newchar><newabs>22105615<newchar>Myxomatous mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is the most common cardiac valvular abnormality in industrialized countries and a leading cause of mitral valve surgery for isolated mitral regurgitation. The key role of valvular interstitial cells (VICs) during mitral valve development and homeostasis has been recently suggested, however little is known about the molecular pathways leading to MVP. We aim to characterize bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) as a cellular regulator of mitral VIC activation towards a pathologic synthetic phenotype and to analyze the cellular phenotypic changes and extracellular matrix (ECM) reorganization associated with the development of myxomatous MVP. Microarray analysis showed significant up regulation of BMP4-mediated signaling molecules in myxomatous MVP when compared to controls. Histological analysis and cellular characterization suggest that during myxomatous MVP development, healthy quiescent mitral VICs undergo a phenotypic activation via up regulation of BMP4-mediated pathway. In vitro hBMP4 treatment of isolated human mitral VICs mimics the cellular activation and ECM remodeling as seen in MVP tissues. The present study characterizes the cell biology of mitral VICs in physiological and pathological conditions and provides insights into the molecular and cellular mechanisms mediated by BMP4 during MVP. The ability to test and control the plasticity of VICs using different molecules may help in developing new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for myxomatous MVP.<newchar><newabs>17544501<newchar>Collagen type I and fibrin hydrogels have been used for cell-based therapies and tissue engineering. These matrices can be broken down and remodeled by cells, but the effects that these proteins have on cell function are not completely understood. We examined activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) in response to 2D and 3D matrices of type I collagen, fibrin, or a 1:1 composite mixture of these proteins. After 3 days of culture, ERK phosphorylation, osteopontin secretion, and MMP-2 activation were all markedly increased in 3D matrices, compared with 2D substrates. A strong positive correlation existed between these protein markers of the synthetic phenotype and phosphorylated ERK levels, and this relationship persisted across matrix geometries and compositions. Cell proliferation in 3D matrices was inversely correlated to ERK activation, while on 2D substrates a modest positive correlation was observed. Pharmacologic inhibition of ERK signaling confirmed that this pathway was involved in the observed phenotype shifts. This study suggests that contextual activation of the ERK pathway results in different effects on cell phenotype, depending on the geometry and composition of the ECM. These findings add to our understanding of cell function and remodeling in protein-based hydrogel biomaterials.<newchar><newabs>20804746<newchar>During embryogenesis the heart valves develop from undifferentiated mesenchymal endocardial cushions (EC), and activated interstitial cells of adult diseased valves share characteristics of embryonic valve progenitors. Twist1, a class II basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is expressed during early EC development and is down-regulated later during valve remodeling. The requirements for Twist1 down-regulation in the remodeling valves and the consequences of prolonged Twist1 activity were examined in transgenic mice with persistent expression of Twist1 in developing and mature valves. Persistent Twist1 expression in the remodeling valves leads to increased valve cell proliferation, increased expression of Tbx20, and increased extracellular matrix (ECM) gene expression, characteristic of early valve progenitors. Among the ECM genes predominant in the EC, Col2a1 was identified as a direct transcriptional target of Twist1. Increased Twist1 expression also leads to dysregulation of fibrillar collagen and periostin expression, as well as enlarged hypercellular valve leaflets prior to birth. In human diseased aortic valves, increased Twist1 expression and cell proliferation are observed adjacent to nodules of calcification. Overall, these data implicate Twist1 as a critical regulator of valve development and suggest that Twist1 influences ECM production and cell proliferation during disease.<newchar><newabs>21494794<newchar>Cell migration through the extracellular matrix (ECM) is one of the key features for physiological and pathological processes such as angiogenesis, cancer metastasis, and wound healing. In particular, the quantitative assay of endothelial cell migration under the well-defined three dimensional (3D) microenvironment is important to analyze the angiogenesis mechanism. In this study, we report a microfluidic assay of endothelial cell sprouting and migration into an interpenetrating polymer semi-network HA-Collagen (SIPNs CH) hydrogel as ECM providing an enhanced in vivo mimicking 3D microenvironment to cells. The microfluidic chip could provide a well-controlled gradient of growth factor to cells, whereas the hydrogel could mimic a well-defined 3D microenvironment in vivo. (In addition/Furthermore, the microfluidic chip gives a well-controlled gradient of growth factor to cells) For this reason, three types of hydrogel, composed of semi-interpenetrating networks of collagen and hyaluronic acid were prepared, and firstly we proved the role of the hydrogel in endothelial cell migration. The diffusion property and swelling ratio of the hydrogel were characterized. It modulated the migration of endothelial cells in quantified manner, also being influenced by additional synthesis of Matrix metalloproteinase(MMP)-sensitive remodeling peptides and Arginine-glycine-lycinee (RGD) cell adhesion peptides. We successfully established a novel cell migration platform by changing major determinants such as ECM material under biochemical synthesis and under growth factor gradients in a microfluidic manner.<newchar><newabs>16174279<newchar>Diabetic nephropathy is characterized by excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the kidney. Decreased ECM degradation as well as increased ECM synthesis plays an important role in ECM remodeling that favours tissue fibrosis. Plasminogen activator (PA)/plasmin/PA inhibitor (PAI) system is involved in ECM degradation and PAI-1 plays a critical role in ECM remodeling in the kidney. Normal human kidneys do not express PAI-1 but PAI-1 is overexpressed in pathologic conditions associated with renal fibrosis including diabetic nephropathy. Reactive oxygen species mediate PAI-1 up-regulation in renal cells cultured under high glucose, hypoxia, and TGF-beta1. Recent studies utilizing PAI-1 deficient mice suggest that PAI-1 induce ECM deposition in diabetic kidney through increased ECM synthesis by TGF-beta1 up-regulation as well as through decreased ECM degradation by suppression of plasmin and MMP-2 activity.<newchar><newabs>22893604<newchar>Tendon injuries, degenerative tendinopathies, and overuse tendinitis are common in races horses. Novel therapies aim to restore tendon functionality by means of cell-based therapy, growth factor delivery, and tissue engineering approaches. This study examined the use of autologous mesenchymal stromal cells derived from peripheral blood (PB-MSCs), platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and a combination of both for ameliorating experimental lesions on deep digital flexor tendons (DDFT) of Bergamasca sheep. In particular, testing the combination of blood-derived MSCs and PRP in an experimental animal model represents one of the few studies exploring a putative synergistic action of these treatments. Effectiveness of treatments was evaluated at 30 and 120 days comparing clinical, ultrasonographic, and histological features together with immunohistochemical expression of collagen types 1 and 3, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP). Significant differences were found between treated groups and their corresponding controls (placebo) regarding tendon morphology and extracellular matrix (ECM) composition. However, our results indicate that the combined use of PRP and MSCs did not produce an additive or synergistic regenerative response and highlighted the predominant effect of MSCs on tendon healing, enhanced tissue remodeling and improved structural organization.<newchar><newabs>21661759<newchar>Bone extracellular matrix (ECM) is a 3D network, composed of collagen type I and a number of other macromolecules, including glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), which stimulate signaling pathways that regulate osteoblast growth and differentiation. To model the ECM of bone for tissue regenerative approaches, dense collagen/chitosan (Coll/CTS) hybrid hydrogels were developed using different proportions of CTS to mimic GAG components of the ECM. MC3T3-E1 mouse calvaria preosteoblasts were seeded within plastically compressed Coll/CTS hydrogels with solid content approaching that of native bone osteoid. Dense, cellular Coll/CTS hybrids were maintained for up to 8 weeks under either basal or osteogenic conditions. Higher CTS content significantly increased gel resistance to collagenase degradation. The incorporation of CTS to collagen gels decreased the apparent tensile modulus from 1.82 to 0.33 MPa. In contrast, the compressive modulus of Coll/CTS hybrids increased in direct proportion to CTS content exhibiting an increase from 23.50 to 55.25 kPa. CTS incorporation also led to an increase in scaffold resistance to cell-induced contraction. MC3T3-E1 viability, proliferation, and matrix remodeling capability (via matrix metalloproteinase expression) were maintained. Alkaline phosphatase activity was increased up to two-fold, and quantification of phosphate mineral deposition was significantly increased with CTS incorporation. Thus, dense Coll/CTS scaffolds provide osteoid-like models for the study of osteoblast differentiation and bone tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>21949843<newchar>An important neuropathological feature of neuroinflammatory processes that occur during e.g. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is the formation of an astroglial scar. Astroglial scar formation is facilitated by the interaction between astrocytes and extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) such as fibronectin. Since there is evidence indicating that glial scars strongly inhibit both axon growth and (re)myelination in brain lesions, it is important to understand the factors that contribute to the interaction between astrocytes and ECM proteins. Tissue Transglutaminase (TG2) is a multifunctional enzyme with an ubiquitous tissue distribution, being clearly present within the brain. It has been shown that inflammatory cytokines can enhance TG2 activity. In addition, TG2 can mediate cell adhesion and migration and it binds fibronectin with high affinity. We therefore hypothesized that TG2 is involved in astrocyte-fibronectin interactions. Our studies using primary rat astrocytes show that intracellular and cell surface expression and activity of TG2 is increased after treatment with pro-inflammatory cytokines. Astrocyte-derived TG2 interacts with fibronectin and is involved in astrocyte adhesion onto and migration across fibronectin. TG2 is involved in stimulating focal adhesion formation which is necessary for the interaction of astrocytes with ECM proteins. We conclude that astrocyte-derived TG2 contributes to the interaction between astrocytes and fibronectin. It might thereby regulate ECM remodeling and possibly glial scarring.<newchar><newabs>11525257<newchar>The quality of ulcer repair remains crucial for the stability of the injured tissue and for preventing recurrence. Therefore, we studied the temporo-spatial expression of the fibrillar and basement membrane collagens (types I, III, and IV), the collagenase MMP-2 as well as its inhibitor TIMP-1 before and after oral administration of basic fibroblast growth factor (b-FGF) over 30 days in acetic acid-induced rat gastric ulcers. The alterations and the exact location of the mRNA transcripts and their precipitated proteins were visualized by means of radioactive in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Our data show that hybridization signals of procollagen I could first be identified 2 hours after ulcer induction. After 12 hours the ulcer was established and the mRNA was enhanced at the ulcer margin. After 24-48 hours the other procollagen transcripts were detected and all were further upregulated over the mesenchymal cells of all gastric layers up to 21 days, then declined at 30 days. In contrast, MMP-2 became prominent after 48 hours and up to 21 days. TIMP-1 was enhanced at 72 hours. After oral administration of b-FGF the transcriptional activity of the procollagens and MMP-2 was not significantly altered, while ulcer diameter was significantly reduced. We conclude that the early onset and long duration of collagens' expression points to their central structural and functional role in gastric ulcer healing. MMP-2 seems to be involved in both active ulceration and ECM remodeling. The timing of TIMP/MMP expression may be critical for proper restoration of gastric wall integrity.<newchar><newabs>21082383<newchar>The blood-brain barrier (BBB) comprises the microvascular endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocytes, which are connected by the extracellular matrix (ECM). Current BBB models focus solely on the microvascular endothelial cells which constitute a physical barrier by formation of tight junctions (TJs), while the impact of pericytes on barrier regulation is poorly understood. We established a coculture model from primary porcine brain capillary endothelial cells (PBCECs) and pericytes (PBCPs) to approach the in vivo situation. This model allows the examination of pericyte impact on pharmacological, transport, migration, and metabolic activity of the BBB. In vivo the interaction between pericytes and endothelial cells is partly controlled by the ECM which is remodeled by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Both endothelial cells and pericytes secrete MMPs which are important not only for ECM remodeling but also for TJ cleavage. In this chapter, current methods to study the interactions of these cell types by ECM signaling as well as MMP secretion are described.<newchar><newabs>16456242<newchar>Altered extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition contributing to airway wall remodeling is an important feature of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The molecular mechanisms of this process are poorly understood. One of the key pathological features of these diseases is thickening of airway walls. This thickening is largely to the result of airway smooth muscle (ASM) cell hyperplasia and hypertrophy as well as increased deposition of ECM proteins such as collagens, elastin, laminin, and proteoglycans around the smooth muscle. Many growth factors and cytokines, including fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1, FGF-2, and transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1, that are released from the airway wall have the potential to contribute to airway remodeling, revealed by enhanced ASM proliferation and increased ECM protein deposition. TGF-beta1 and FGF-1 stimulate mRNA expression of collagen I and III in ASM cells, suggesting their role in the deposition of extracellular matrix proteins by ASM cells in the airways of patients with chronic lung diseases. Focus is now on the bidirectional relationship between ASM cells and the ECM. In addition to increased synthesis of ECM proteins, ASM cells can be involved in downregulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and upregulation of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), thus eventually contributing to the alteration in ECM. In turn, ECM proteins promote the survival, proliferation, cytokine synthesis, migration, and contraction of human airway smooth muscle cells. Thus, the intertwined relationship of ASM and ECM and their response to stimuli such as chronic inflammation in diseases such as asthma and COPD contribute to the remodeling seen in airways of patients with these diseases.<newchar><newabs>22609561<newchar>Branching morphogenesis is a fundamental developmental process which results in amplification of epithelial surface area for exchanging molecules in organs including the lung, kidney, mammary gland and salivary gland. These complex tree-like structures are built by iterative rounds of simple routines of epithelial morphogenesis, including bud formation, extension, and bifurcation, that require constant remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the cytoskeleton. In this review, we highlight the current understanding of the role of the ECM and cytoskeletal dynamics in branching morphogenesis across these different organs. The cellular and molecular mechanisms shared during this morphogenetic process provide insight into the development of other branching organs.<newchar><newabs>23141425<newchar>Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) has been reported to play an important role in tissue fibrosis and presents a promising therapeutic target for fibrotic diseases. In heart, inappropriate increase in level of CTGF promotes fibroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation, thereby exacerbating cardiac hypertrophy and subsequent failure. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the major polyphenol found in green tea, possesses multiple protective effects on the cardiovascular system including cardiac fibrosis. However, the molecular mechanism by which EGCG exerts its anti-fibrotic effects has not been well investigated. In this study, we found that EGCG could significantly reduce collagen synthesis, fibronectin (FN) expression and cell proliferation in rat cardiac fibroblasts stimulated with angiotensinII (AngII). It also ameliorated cardiac fibrosis in rats submitted to abdominal aortic constriction (AAC). Moreover, EGCG attenuated the excessive expression of CTGF induced by AAC or AngII, and reduced the nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 subunit and degradation of IκB-α. Subsequently, we demonstrated that in cardiac fibroblasts NF-κB inhibition could suppress AngII-induced CTGF expression. Taken together, these findings provide the first evidence that the effect of EGCG against cardiac fibrosis may be attributed to its inhibition on NF-κB activation and subsequent CTGF overexpression, suggesting the therapeutic potential of EGCG on the prevention of cardiac remodeling in patients with pressure overload hypertrophy.<newchar><newabs>23527099<newchar>The ratio of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) to the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) in wounded tissues strictly control the protease activity of MMPs, and therefore regulate the progress of wound closure, tissue regeneration and scar formation. Some amphibians (i.e. axolotl/newt) demonstrate complete regeneration of missing or wounded digits and even limbs; MMPs play a critical role during amphibian regeneration. Conversely, mammalian wound healing re-establishes tissue integrity, but at the expense of scar tissue formation. The differences between amphibian regeneration and mammalian wound healing can be attributed to the greater ratio of MMPs to TIMPs in amphibian tissue. Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of MMP1 to effectively promote skeletal muscle regeneration by favoring extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling to enhance cell proliferation and migration. In this study, MMP1 was administered to the digits amputated at the mid-second phalanx of adult mice to observe its effect on digit regeneration. Results indicated that the regeneration of soft tissue and the rate of wound closure were significantly improved by MMP1 administration, but the elongation of the skeletal tissue was insignificantly affected. During digit regeneration, more mutipotent progenitor cells, capillary vasculature and neuromuscular-related tissues were observed in MMP1 treated tissues; moreover, there was less fibrotic tissue formed in treated digits. In summary, MMP1 was found to be effective in promoting wound healing in amputated digits of adult mice.<newchar><newabs>21665268<newchar>Ovine forestomach matrix (OFM) biomaterial acts as a biomimetic of native extracellular matrix (ECM) by providing structural and functional cues to orchestrate cell activity during tissue regeneration. The ordered collagen matrix of the biomaterial is supplemented with secondary ECM-associated macromolecules that function in cell adhesion, migration and communication. As angiogenesis and vasculogenesis are critical processes during tissue regeneration we sought to quantify the angiogenic properties of the OFM biomaterial. In vitro studies demonstrated that soluble OFM components stimulated human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) migration and increased vascular sprouting from an aorta. Blood vessel density and branch points increased in response to OFM in an ex ovo chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay. The OFM biomaterial was shown to undergo remodeling in a porcine full-thickness excisional model and gave rise to significantly more blood vessels than wounds treated with small intestinal submucosa decellularized ECM or untreated wounds.<newchar><newabs>21251977<newchar>Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways characterized by airway remodeling, which includes changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM). However the role of the ECM in mediating these changes is poorly understood. Hyaluronan (HA), a major component of the ECM, has been implicated in asthma as well as in many other biological processes. Our study investigates the processes involved in HA synthesis, deposition, localization and degradation during an acute and chronic murine model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergic pulmonary inflammation. Mice were sensitized, challenged to OVA and sacrificed at various time points during an 8-week challenge protocol. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluids, blood, and lung tissue were collected for study. RNA, HA, protein and histopathology were analyzed. Analyses of lung sections and BAL fluids revealed an early deposition and an increase in HA levels within 24 h of antigen exposure. HA levels peaked at day 8 in BAL, while inflammatory cell recovery peaked at day 6. Hyaluronan synthase (HAS)1 and HAS2 on RNA levels peaked within 2 h of antigen exposure, while hyaluronidase (HYAL)1 and HYAL2 on RNA levels decreased. Both inflammatory cell infiltrates and collagen deposition co-localized with HA deposition within the lungs. These data support a role for HA in the pathogenesis of inflammation and airway remodeling in a murine model of asthma. HA deposition appears largely due to up regulation of HAS1 and HAS2. In addition, HA appears to provide the scaffolding for inflammatory cell accumulation as well as for new collagen synthesis and deposition.<newchar><newabs>23592480<newchar>The proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1) signals through IL-1 receptor type I (IL-1RI) and induces osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption mainly during pathological conditions. Little is known about the effect of excess or absence of IL-1 signaling on the physiological development of the growth plate and bone. In this study, we examine growth plate morphology, bone structure, and mechanical properties as well as osteoclast number in IL-1RI knockout mice to evaluate the role of IL-1RI in the normal development of the growth plate and bone. We show for the first time that IL-1RI knockout mice have narrower growth plates due to a smaller hypertrophic zone, suggesting a role for this cytokine in hypertrophic differentiation, together with higher proteoglycan content. The bones of theses mice exhibit higher trabecular and cortical mass, increased mineral density, and superior mechanical properties. In addition, IL-1RI knockout mice have significantly reduced osteoclast numbers in the chondro-osseous junction, trabecular bone, and cortical bone. These results suggest that IL-1RI is involved in normal growth plate development and ECM homeostasis and that it is significant in the physiological process of bone modeling.<newchar>bone mechanics<n-term>bone structure<n-term>interleukin-1<n-term>interleukin-1 receptor type I<n-term>osteoclasts<n-term><newabs>17567861<newchar>Cell-level mechanical and 3D spatial cues are essential to the organization and architecture of new tissues that form during growth, repair or in bioreactors. Fibroblast-seeded 3D collagen constructs have been used as bioartifical extracellular matrix (ECM) providing a 3D environment to embedded resident cells. As cells attach to scaffold fibrils, they generate quantifiable contractile forces which depend on cell type, cell attachment, cell density, growth factors, and matrix stiffness. The aim of this study was to quantify the cytomechanical and molecular responses of human dermal (HDF) and neonatal foreskin fibroblasts (HNFF) seeded in constructs of increased stiffness. We also tested the effect of blocking early attachment using serum starvation on these outputs. Constructs were placed under uniaxial strains of 0-10% to increase scaffold stiffness, prior to gel contraction, and force generation was monitored using a tensional culture force monitor (t-CFM). Increased matrix stiffness reduced generation of quantifiable cellular force (up to 70%) over 24 h in both cell types and delayed the onset of measurable contraction (upto sevenfold). The delay of measurable force generation was cell lineage dependent but not FCS dependent. Gene expression of MMP-2, TIMP-2, and collagen type III expression in HDFs were significantly upregulated in constructs of increased stiffness. HNFFs did not show any significant changes in these gene expressions indicating a lineage specific response.<newchar><newabs>21105842<newchar>Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a fatal disease characterized by a progressive increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and vascular remodeling leading to right heart failure and early death. The pathology of PAH is associated with endothelium dysfunction and vascular remodeling in pulmonary arteries. In diseased pulmonary arteries, the balance between matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP) is broken down. In this process, TIMP are up-regulated, which inhibits MMP, promotes extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and finally leads to vascular remodeling. So, what would happen to PAH if the expression of TIMP was down-regulated in diseased pulmonary vessels? We hypothesize that the attenuation of TIMP at the advanced stage of PAH might reverse severe PAH, via ameliorating vascular remodeling and endothelium repair.<newchar><newabs>23390561<newchar>The hallmark of a variety of fibrotic diseases such as liver fibrosis, lung fibrosis, skin fibrosis and atherosclerosis is extensive extracellular matrix remodeling (ECMr) of the disease affected tissue. Inflammation often leads to tissue disruption and destruction, upon which locally released battery of proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases and cysteine proteases degrade the surrounding matrix. The degradation products of ECM proteins, the co-called neoepitopes, are released into the systemic circulation. By recent development of Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISAs) detecting the pathological tissue turnover in atherosclerosis and liver fibrosis, we have introduced a novel class of biomarkers into the field of fibrotic diseases, which have been proved efficient in the early diagnosis. This work has resulted in identification of common mechanisms involving specific cell types, proteins and proteases as well as pathways shared among the fibrotic diseases. In this analysis we seek to answer following questions: a) Are there common disease mechanisms and cell types involved in both atherosclerosis and fibrosis? b) Can the lessons learned in developing fibrosis biomarkers be used for the development of atherosclerosis biomarkers? Our hypothesis is that by answering the above questions, we may be able to improve general understanding of the early-stage disease initiation and progression of fibrotic diseases, which in turn may aid in early diagnosis, prognosis and ultimately patient management.<newchar>Atherosclerosis<n-term>biomarkers<n-term>collagens<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>fibrosis<n-term>matrix metalloproteinases<n-term>neoepitopes<n-term>proteoglycans<n-term><newabs>19342461<newchar>Cumulus cells surround the oocyte and regulate the production and assembly of the extracellular matrix (ECM) around the cumulus-oocyte complex for its timely interaction with sperm in the oviduct. We recently found that C-C chemokines such as CCL2, CCL7, and CCL9 are produced and stimulate integrin-mediated ECM assembly in the postovulatory cumulus to protect eggs and that prostaglandin E(2)-EP2 signaling in the cumulus cells facilitates fertilization by suppressing this chemokine signaling, which otherwise results in fertilization failure by preventing sperm penetration through the cumulus ECM. However, it remains unknown as to what mechanisms underlie chemokine-induced cumulus ECM assembly. Here we report that inhibition of EP2 signaling or addition of CCL7 augments RhoA activation and induces the surface accumulation of integrin and the contraction of cumulus cells. Enhanced surface accumulation of integrin then stimulates the formation and assembly of fibronectin fibrils as well as induces cumulus ECM resistance to hyaluronidase and sperm penetration. These changes in the cumulus ECM as well as cell contraction are relieved by the addition of Y27632 or blebbistatin. These results suggest that chemokines induce integrin engagement to the ECM and consequent ECM remodeling through the RhoA/Rho kinase/actomyosin pathway, making the cumulus ECM barrier resistant to sperm penetration. Based on these results, we propose that prostaglandin E(2)-EP2 signaling negatively regulates chemokine-induced Rho/ROCK signaling in cumulus cells for successful fertilization.<newchar><newabs>18553078<newchar>Chronic LPS inhalation causes submucosal thickening and airway narrowing. To address the hypothesis that environmental airway disease is, in part, a fibroproliferative lung disease, we exposed C57BL/6 mice daily to LPS by inhalation for up to 2 months followed by 1 month of recovery. C57BL/6 mice exposed to daily inhaled LPS had significantly enhanced mRNA expression of TGF-beta1, TIMP-1, fibronectin-1, and pro-collagen types I, III, and IV and show prominent submucosal expression of the myofibroblast markers desmin and alpha-smooth muscle actin. To further characterize global gene expression in airway fibroproliferation, we performed microarray analysis on total lung RNA from mice exposed to LPS both acutely and chronically. This analysis revealed a subset of genes typically associated with lung injury and repair, and ECM homeostasis. To further identify candidate genes specifically involved in generic fibroproliferation, we interrogated this analysis with genes induced in C57BL/6 mouse lung by bleomycin. This analysis yielded a list of 212 genes in common suggesting that there is a common subset of genes that regulate fibroproliferation in the lung independent of etiologic agent and site of injury.<newchar><newabs>15882553<newchar>Despite the strides made toward understanding cardiac abnormalities in obesity-induced hypertension, the composition and concentration of cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) components resulting from diet-induced obesity are largely unknown. Previous studies from our laboratory have demonstrated differential expression of collagens, growth factors, and homocysteine (Hcy) in pressure overload models of cardiac hypertrophy. The hypothesis of the present study was that left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) from the combined pressure and volume overload of obesity induced cardiac fibrosis in part by increasing Hcy, increasing transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), and decreasing decorin. Using the rabbit model, we examined the changes in cardiac collagen accumulation, plasma Hcy, left ventricular (LV) TGF-beta1, and LV decorin after 12 weeks of developing obesity. Cardiac fibrosis was analyzed by trichrome stain for collagens. Total collagens types I and III, TGF-beta1, and decorin were analyzed in tissue homogenates by immunoblots and quantitated with a densitometer. After 12 weeks, rabbits eating a high-fat diet had greater body weight (5.38 +/- 0.3 kg v 3.73 +/- 0.6 kg) and greater LV weight (5.08 +/- 0.05 g v 3.86 +/- 0.17 g) compared with lean rabbits. Heart rate was also significantly higher in obese than in lean rabbits (221 +/- 8 v 173 +/- 5 beats/min). Plasma concentrations of circulating Hcy were 16.9 +/- 2.4 micromol/L and 24.3 +/- 1.8 micromol/L in lean and obese rabbits, respectively. Compared with lean rabbits, obese rabbits had increased interstitial and perivascular collagen, a 4-fold increase in the medial/lumen ratio of coronary vessels, a 1.75-fold increase in cardiac collagen I, and a 1.5-fold increase in cardiac collagen III levels. Levels of TGF-beta1 were increased 1.75-fold, whereas decorin levels were significantly reduced in obese compared with lean rabbits. In conclusion, a high-fat diet, even over a period as short as 12 weeks, causes fibrosis in coronary vessels as well as accumulation of collagen in the cardiac interstitium. The accumulation of cardiac collagen was associated with induction of Hcy and TGF-beta1 and with suppression of decorin.<newchar><newabs>23468612<newchar>An integrative cell migration model incorporating focal adhesion (FA) dynamics, cytoskeleton and nucleus remodeling, actin motor activity, and lamellipodia protrusion is developed for predicting cell spreading and migration behaviors. This work is motivated by two experimental works: (1) cell migration on 2-D substrates under various fibronectin concentrations and (2) cell spreading on 2-D micropatterned geometries. These works suggest (1) cell migration speed takes a maximum at a particular ligand density (∼1140 molecules/µm(2)) and (2) that strong traction forces at the corners of the patterns may exist due to combined effects exerted by actin stress fibers (SFs). The integrative model of this paper successfully reproduced these experimental results and indicates the mechanism of cell migration and spreading. In this paper, the mechanical structure of the cell is modeled as having two elastic membranes: an outer cell membrane and an inner nuclear membrane. The two elastic membranes are connected by SFs, which are extended from focal adhesions on the cortical surface to the nuclear membrane. In addition, the model also includes ventral SFs bridging two focal adhesions on the cell surface. The cell deforms and gains traction as transmembrane integrins distributed over the outer cell membrane bond to ligands on the ECM surface, activate SFs, and form focal adhesions. The relationship between the cell migration speed and fibronectin concentration agrees with existing experimental data for Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell migrations on fibronectin coated surfaces. In addition, the integrated model is validated by showing persistent high stress concentrations at sharp geometrically patterned edges. This model will be used as a predictive model to assist in design and data processing of upcoming microfluidic cell migration assays.<newchar><newabs>23977064<newchar>Tumor fibroblasts are active partners in tumor progression, but the genes and pathways that mediate this collaboration are ill-defined. Previous work demonstrates that Ets2 function in stromal cells significantly contributes to breast tumor progression. Conditional mouse models were used to study the function of Ets2 in both mammary stromal fibroblasts and epithelial cells. Conditional inactivation of Ets2 in stromal fibroblasts in PyMT and ErbB2 driven tumors significantly reduced tumor growth, however deletion of Ets2 in epithelial cells in the PyMT model had no significant effect. Analysis of gene expression in fibroblasts revealed a tumor- and Ets2-dependent gene signature that was enriched in genes important for ECM remodeling, cell migration, and angiogenesis in both PyMT and ErbB2 driven-tumors. Consistent with these results, PyMT and ErbB2 tumors lacking Ets2 in fibroblasts had fewer functional blood vessels, and Ets2 in fibroblasts elicited changes in gene expression in tumor endothelial cells consistent with this phenotype. An in vivo angiogenesis assay revealed the ability of Ets2 in fibroblasts to promote blood vessel formation in the absence of tumor cells. Importantly, the Ets2-dependent gene expression signatures from both mouse models were able to distinguish human breast tumor stroma from normal stroma, and correlated with patient outcomes in two whole tumor breast cancer data sets. The data reveals a key function for Ets2 in tumor fibroblasts in signaling to endothelial cells to promote tumor angiogenesis. The results highlight the collaborative networks that orchestrate communication between stromal cells and tumor cells, and suggest that targeting tumor fibroblasts may be an effective strategy for developing novel anti-angiogenic therapies.<newchar><newabs>17387691<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play critical roles in egg fertilization, embryonic development, wound repair, cancer, and inflammatory and neurologic diseases. This subfamily of metzincin peptidases can cleave extracellular matrix (ECM) and pericellular proteins that have profound effects on cell behavior. Among known MMP substrates are several proteins that play important roles in synaptogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and long-term potentiation (LTP). In this Mini-Review we discuss how MMP-directed cleavage of these proteins can impact the formation and function of synapses within the brain. Pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus, and other large neurons, are surrounded by perineuronal nets that are composed of brevican, tenascin-R, and laminin, each of which is subject to proteolytic cleavage by MMPs. Tenascin-R knockout mice show deficits in learning and memory and LTP, as do at least two MMP knockouts. Impaired LTP is also seen in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) knockout mice, which is interesting in that pro-BDNF can be processed into mature BDNF by several MMPs and thereby regulate activation of the high-affinity BDNF receptor TrkB. At the synaptic level, MMP substrates also include ephrins, Eph receptors, and cadherins, which are also involved in synapse development and plasticity. MMPs can also process membrane-bound tumor necrosis factor-alpha into a potent soluble cytokine that is increasingly implicated in neuron-glial signaling, particularly in neurologic disease. Finally, we discuss how the development of therapeutics to attenuate MMP activity in neurodegenerative disorders may become powerful tools for future studies of synaptic formation and function within the developing and mature brain.<newchar><newabs>19778181<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of a complex mixture of macromolecules such as collagens, proteoglycans, glycoproteins, and elastic fibers. ECM is essential to preserving tissue architecture, signaling to cells, and regulating calcification in mineralized tissues. Osteoblasts in culture secrete and assemble an extensive ECM rich in type I collagen, and other noncollagenous proteins that can be mineralized. Three-dimensional matrix models can be used in vitro to most appropriately resemble the geometry and biochemistry of natural ECMs. In the present study, MC3T3-E1 mouse calvarial preosteoblasts were cultured within a dense three-dimensional collagenous ECM-like scaffold produced through the method of plastic compression. Plastic compression rapidly produces scaffolds of collagen density approaching native tissue levels with enhanced biomechanical properties while maintaining the viability of resident cells. The proliferation, morphology, and gene expression of seeded MC3T3s, as well as collagen production and matrix mineralization, were investigated for up to 7 weeks in culture. Soluble collagen secretion ranged in concentration from 5 to 30 microg/mL over a 24-h period, concomitant with a steady rate of collagen mRNA expression. Expression of osteogenic markers such as tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (Alpl), bone sialoprotein (Bsp), and osteopontin (Opn) examined by biochemical assay and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction demonstrated cell differentiation. Pericellular voids of ECM around cells, together with evidence of MMP13 mRNA expression, suggested matrix remodeling. Ultrastructural analyses, X-ray microanalysis, micro-computed tomography, as well as Fourier-transform infrared and imaging all confirmed the formation of a calcium-phosphate mineral phase within the fibrillar collagen matrix. In conclusion, preosteoblastic MC3T3 cells seeded within an ECM-like dense collagen scaffold secrete matrix proteins and induce scaffold mineralization in a manner potentially appropriate for bone tissue engineering uses.<newchar><newabs>12726863<newchar>The mechanisms of drug resistance in cancer are poorly understood. Serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) profiling of cisplatin-resistant and sensitive cells revealed many differentially expressed genes. Remarkably, many ECM genes were elevated in cisplatin-resistant cells. COL6A3 was one of the most highly upregulated genes, and cultivation of cisplatin-sensitive cells in the presence of collagen VI protein promoted resistance in vitro. Staining of ovarian tumors with collagen VI antibodies confirmed collagen VI expression in vivo and suggested reorganization of the extracellular matrix in the vicinity of the tumor. Furthermore, the presence of collagen VI correlated with tumor grade, an ovarian cancer prognostic factor. These results suggest that tumor cells may directly remodel their microenvironment to increase their survival in the presence of chemotherapeutic drugs.<newchar><newabs>23329998<newchar>Skeletal muscle is a large and complex system that is crucial for structural support, movement and function. When injured, the repair of skeletal muscle undergoes three phases: inflammation and degeneration, regeneration and fibrosis formation in severe injuries. During fibrosis formation, muscle healing is impaired because of the accumulation of excess collagen. A group of zinc-dependent endopeptidases that have been found to aid in the repair of skeletal muscle are matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMPs are able to assist in tissue remodeling through the regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, as well as contributing to cell migration, proliferation, differentiation and angiogenesis. In the present study, the effect of GM6001, a broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor, on muscle-derived stem cells (MDSCs) is investigated. We find that MMP inhibition negatively impacts skeletal muscle healing by impairing MDSCs in migratory and multiple differentiation abilities. These results indicate that MMP signaling plays an essential role in the wound healing of muscle tissue because their inhibition is detrimental to stem cells residing in skeletal muscle.<newchar>MMPs<n-term>Skeletal muscle stem cells<n-term>cell migration<n-term>differentiation<n-term><newabs>22117643<newchar>During central nervous system (CNS) development, individual oligodendrocytes myelinate multiple axons, thus requiring the outgrowth and extensive branching of oligodendroglial processes. Laminin (Lm)-deficient mice have a lower percentage of myelinated axons, which may indicate a defect in the ability to properly extend and branch processes. It remains unclear, however, to what extent extracellular matrix (ECM) receptors contribute to oligodendroglial process remodeling itself. In the current study, we report that the ECM receptor dystroglycan is necessary for Lm enhancement of filopodial formation, process outgrowth, and process branching in differentiating oligodendroglia. During early oligodendroglial differentiation, the disruption of dystroglycan-Lm interactions, via blocking antibodies or dystroglycan small interfering RNA (siRNA), resulted in decreased filopodial number and length, decreased process length, and decreased numbers of primary and secondary processes. Later in oligodendrocyte differentiation, dystroglycan-deficient cells developed fewer branches, thus producing less complex networks of processes as determined by Sholl analysis. In newly differentiating oligodendroglia, dystroglycan was localized in filopodial tips, whereas, in more mature oligodendrocytes, dystroglycan was enriched in focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-positive focal adhesion structures. These results suggest that dystroglycan-Lm interactions influence oligodendroglial process dynamics and therefore may regulate the myelination capacity of individual oligodendroglia.<newchar><newabs>19331815<newchar>The intracellular signaling molecule mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is essential for cell growth and proliferation. It is involved in mouse embryogenesis, murine trophoblast outgrowth and linked to tumor cell invasiveness. In order to assess the role of mTOR in human trophoblast invasion we analyzed the in vitro invasiveness of HTR-8/SVneo immortalized first-trimester trophoblast cells in conjunction with enzyme secretion upon mTOR inhibition and knockdown of mTOR protein expression. Additionally, we also tested the capability of mTOR to trigger signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-3 by its phosphorylation status. Rapamycin inhibited mTOR kinase activity as demonstrated with a lower phosphorylation level of the mTOR substrate p70 S6 kinase (S6K). With the use of rapamycin and siRNA-mediated mTOR knockdown we could show that cell proliferation, invasion and secretion of matrix-metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and -9, urokinase-like plasminogen activator (uPA) and its major physiological uPA inhibitor (PAI)-1 were inhibited. While tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 was unaffected by mTOR inhibition and knockdown, serine phosphorylation was diminished. We conclude that mTOR signaling is one major mechanism in a tightly regulated network of intracellular signal pathways including the JAK/STAT system to regulate invasion in human trophoblast cells by secretion of enzymes that remodel the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) such as MMP-2, -9, uPA and PAI-1. Dysregulation of mTOR may contribute to pregnancy-related pathologies caused through impaired trophoblast invasion.<newchar><newabs>20675565<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a critical aspect of cardiac remodeling following myocardial infarction. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are physiological inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that degrade the ECM proteins. TIMP3 is highly expressed in the heart, and is markedly downregulated in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. We therefore examined the time- and region-dependent role of TIMP3 in the cardiac response to myocardial infarction (MI). TIMP3(-/-) and wild-type (WT) mice were subjected to MI by ligation of the left anterior descending artery. TIMP3(-/-)-MI mice exhibited a significantly compromised rate of survival compared with WT-MI mice, primarily due to increased left ventricular (LV) rupture, greater infarct expansion, exacerbated LV dilation, and greater systolic and diastolic dysfunction. Second harmonic generation imaging of unfixed and unstained hearts revealed greater collagen disarray and reduced density in the TIMP3(-/-) infarct myocardium compared with the WT group. Gelatinolytic and collagenolytic activities increased in TIMP3(-/-) compared with WT hearts at 1 day post-MI but not at 3 days or 1 wk post-MI. Neutrophil infiltration and inflammatory MMPs were significantly increased in the infarct and peri-infarct regions of TIMP3(-/-)-MI hearts. Treatment of TIMP3(-/-) mice with a broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor (PD-166793) for 2 days before and 2 days after MI markedly improved post-MI infarct expansion, LV rupture incident, LV dilation, and systolic dysfunction in these mice up to 1 wk post-MI. Our data demonstrate that the initial rise in proteolytic activities early post-MI is a triggering factor for subsequent LV adverse remodeling, LV rupture, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Hence, timing of treatments to improve cardiac response to MI may be critical in producing favorable outcome.<newchar><newabs>17508918<newchar>Glucose-mediated impairment of homocysteine (Hcy) metabolism and decrease in renal clearance contribute to hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) in diabetes. The Hcy induces oxidative stress, inversely relates to the expression of peroxisome proliferators activated receptor (PPAR), and contributes to diabetic complications. Extracellular matrix (ECM) functionally links the endothelium to the myocyte and is important for cardiac synchronization. However, in diabetes and hyperhomocysteinemia, a &quot;disconnection&quot; is caused by activated matrix metalloproteinase with subsequent accumulation of oxidized matrix (fibrosis) between the endothelium and myocyte (E-M). This contributes to &quot;endothelial-myocyte uncoupling,&quot; attenuation of cardiac synchrony, leading to diastolic heart failure (DHF), and cardiac dys-synchronizatrion. The decreased levels of thioredoxin and peroxiredoxin and cardiac tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase are in response to antagonizing PPARgamma.<newchar><newabs>22960625<newchar>Cardiac fibrosis is characterized by aberrant proliferation of cardiac fibroblasts and exaggerated deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) in the myocardial interstitial, and ultimately impairs cardiac function. It is still controversial whether microRNA-21 (miR-21) participates in the process of cardiac fibrosis. Our previous study confirmed that transforming growth factor beta receptor III (TGFβRIII) is a negative regulator of TGF-β pathway. Here, we aimed to decipher the relationship between miR-21 and TGFβRIII in the pathogenic process of myocardial fibrosis. We found that TGF-β1 and miR-21 were up-regulated, whereas TGFβRIII was down-regulated in the border zone of mouse hearts in response to myocardial infarction. After transfection of miR-21 into cardiac fibroblasts, TGFβRIII expression was markedly reduced and collagen content was increased. And, luciferase results confirmed that TGFβRIII was a target of miR-21. It suggests that up-regulation of miR-21 could increase the collagen content and at least in part through inhibiting TGFβRIII. Conversely, we also confirmed that overexpression of TGFβRIII could inhibit the expression of miR-21 and reduce collagen production in fibroblasts. Further studies showed that overexpression of TGFβRIII could also deactivate TGF-β1 pathway by decreasing the expression of TGF-β1 and phosphorylated-Smad3 (p-Smad3). TGF-β1 has been proven as a positive regulator of miR-21. Taken together, we found a novel reciprocal loop between miR-21 and TGFβRIII in cardiac fibrosis caused by myocardial infarction in mice, and targeting this pathway could be a new strategy for the prevention and treatment of myocardial remodeling.<newchar><newabs>22814255<newchar>Cell migration is a multistep process initiated by extracellular matrix components that leads to cytoskeletal changes and formation of different protrusive structures at the cell periphery. Lumican, a small extracellular matrix leucine-rich proteoglycan, has been shown to inhibit human melanoma cell migration by binding to α2β1 integrin and affecting actin cytoskeleton organization. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of lumican overexpression on the migration ability of human colon adenocarcinoma LS180 cells. The cells stably transfected with plasmid containing lumican cDNA were characterized by the increased chemotactic migration measured on Transwell filters. Lumican-overexpressing cells presented the elevated filamentous to monomeric actin ratio and gelsolin up-regulation. This was accompanied by a distinct cytoskeletal actin rearrangement and gelsolin subcellular relocation, as observed under laser scaning confocal microscope. Moreover, LS180 cells overexpressing lumican tend to form podosome-like structures as indicated by vinculin redistribution and its colocalization with gelsolin and actin at the submembrane region of the cells. In conclusion, the elevated level of lumican secretion to extracellular space leads to actin cytoskeletal remodeling followed by an increase in migration capacity of human colon LS180 cells. These data suggest that lumican expression and its presence in ECM has an impact on colon cancer cells motility and may modulate invasiveness of colon cancer.<newchar><newabs>20504902<newchar>Our previous studies demonstrate that 17beta-estradiol limits chronic volume overload-induced hypertrophy and improves heart function in ovariectomized rats. One possible cardioprotective mechanism involves the interaction between estrogen, estrogen receptors, and proteins of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The impact of estrogen deficiency and replacement on left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and ECM protein expression was studied using five female rat groups: intact sham-operated, ovariectomized sham-operated, intact with volume overload, ovariectomized with volume overload, and ovariectomized with volume overload treated with estrogen. After 8 wk, LV protein extracts were evaluated by Western blot analysis for matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9, MT1-MMP, tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP)-1, TIMP-2, TIMP-3 and TIMP-4, collagens type I and III, and estrogen receptor alpha and beta expression. MMP proteolytic activity was assessed by zymography. All volume-overloaded groups exhibited LV hypertrophy, which was associated with a loss of interstitial collagen and perivascular fibrosis. After 8 wk of volume overload, 70% of ovariectomized rats developed heart failure, in contrast to only one intact rat. A downregulation of MMP-2, estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha), and ERbeta, and upregulation of MMP-9 and MT1-MMP were found in the volume-overloaded hearts of ovariectomized rats. Estrogen treatment improved TIMP-2/MMP-2 and TIMP-1/MMP-9 protein balance, restored ERalpha expression, and prevented MMP-9 activation, perivascular collagen accumulation and development of heart failure. However, estrogen did not fully restore ERbeta expression and did not prevent the increase of MMP-9 expression or loss of interstitial collagen. These results support that estrogen limits undesirable ECM remodeling and LV dilation, in part, through modulation of ECM protein expression in volume-overloaded hearts of ovariectomized rats.<newchar><newabs>20670633<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) provides a platform for cells to maintain structure and function, which in turn maintains tissue function. In response to injury, the ECM undergoes remodeling that involves synthesis, incorporation, and degradation of matrix proteins, with the net outcome determined by the balance of these processes. The major goals of this review are a) to serve as an initial resource for students and investigators new to the cardiac ECM remodeling field, and b) to highlight a few of the key exciting avenues and methodologies that have recently been explored. While we focus on cardiac injury and responses of the left ventricle (LV), the mechanisms reviewed here have pathways in common with other wound healing models.<newchar><newabs>21368102<newchar>The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that remodeling of skeletal muscle extracellular matrix (ECM) is involved in protecting human muscle against injury. Biopsies were obtained from medial gastrocnemius muscles after a single bout of electrical stimulation (B) or a repeated bout (RB) 30 d later, or 30 d after a single stimulation bout (RBc). A muscle biopsy was collected from the control leg for comparison with the stimulated leg. Satellite cell content, tenascin C, and muscle regeneration were assessed by immunohistochemistry; real-time PCR was used to measure mRNA levels of collagens, laminins, heat-shock proteins (HSPs), inflammation, and related growth factors. The large responses of HSPs, CCL2, and tenascin C detected 48 h after a single bout were attenuated in the RB trial, indicative of protection against injury. Satellite cell content and 12 target genes, including IGF-1, were elevated 30 d after a single bout. Among those displaying the greatest difference vs. control muscle, ECM laminin-β1 and collagen types I and III were elevated ∼6- to 9-fold (P&lt;0.001). The findings indicate that the sequenced events of load-induced early deadhesion and later strengthening of skeletal muscle ECM play a role in protecting human muscle against future injury.<newchar><newabs>23187000<newchar>Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs; TIMP-1, -2, -3 and -4) are endogenous inhibitor for matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that are responsible for remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) and involved in migration, invasion and metastasis of tumor cells. Unlike under normal conditions, the imbalance between MMPs and TIMPs is associated with various diseased states. Among TIMPs, TIMP-1, a 184-residue protein, is the only N-linked glycoprotein with glycosylation sites at N30 and N78. The structural analysis of the catalytic domain of human stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) and human TIMP-1 suggests new possibilities of the role of TIMP-1 glycan moieties as a tuner for the proteolytic activities by MMPs. Because the TIMP-1 glycosylation participate in the interaction, aberrant glycosylation of TIMP-1 presumably affects the interaction, thereby leading to pathogenic dysfunction in cancer cells. TIMP-1 has not only the cell proliferation activities but also anti-oncogenic properties. Cancer cells appear to utilize these bilateral aspects of TIMP-1 for cancer progression; an elevated TIMP-1 level exerts to cancer development via MMP-independent pathway during the early phase of tumor formation, whereas it is the aberrant glycosylation of TIMP-1 that overcome the high anti-proteolytic burden. The aberrant glycosylation of TIMP-1 can thus be used as staging and/or prognostic biomarker in colon cancer.<newchar><newabs>19151249<newchar>Malfunctioning mitochondria strongly participate in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular damage associated with hypertension and other disease conditions. Eukaryotic cells move, assume their shape, resist mechanical stress, accommodate their internal constituents, and transmit signals by relying on the constant remodeling of cytoskeleton filaments. Mitochondrial ATP is needed to support cytoskeletal dynamics. Conversely, mitochondria need to interact with cytoskeletal elements to achieve normal motility, morphology, localization, and function. Extracellular matrix (ECM) quantity and quality influence cellular growth, differentiation, morphology, survival, and mobility. Mitochondria can sense ECM composition changes, and changes in mitochondrial functioning modify the ECM. Maladaptive ECM and cytoskeletal alterations occur in a number of cardiac conditions and in most types of glomerulosclerosis, leading to cardiovascular and renal fibrosis, respectively. Angiotensin II (ANG II), a vasoactive peptide and growth factor, stimulates cytosolic and mitochondrial oxidant production, eventually leading to mitochondrial dysfunction. Also, by inducing integrin/focal adhesion changes, ANG II regulates ECM and cytoskeletal composition and organization and, accordingly, contributes to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular remodeling. ANG II-initiated integrin signaling results in the release of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)), a cytokine that modifies ECM composition and structure, induces reorganization of the cytoskeleton, and modifies mitochondrial function. Therefore, it is possible to hypothesize that the depression of mitochondrial energy metabolism brought about by ANG II is preceded by ANG II-induced integrin signaling and the consequent derangement of the cytoskeletal filament network and/or ECM organization. ANG II-dependent TGF-beta(1) release is a potential link between ANG II, ECM, and cytoskeleton derangements and mitochondrial dysfunction. It is necessary to emphasize that the present hypothesis is among many other plausible explanations for ANG II-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction. A potential limitation of this proposal is that the results compiled here were obtained in different cells, tissues, and/or experimental models.<newchar><newabs>20661646<newchar>Previous research in our lab suggested that heart valve tissues cultured without mechanical stimulation do not retain their in vivo microstructure, i.e., cell density decreased within the deep tissue layers and increased at the periphery. In this study, a splashing rotating bioreactor was designed to apply mechanical stimulation to a mitral valve leaflet segment. Porcine valve segments (n = 9-10 per group) were cultured in the bioreactor for 2 weeks (dynamic culture), negative controls were cultured without mechanical stimulation (static culture), and baseline controls were fresh uncultured samples. Overall changes in cellularity and extracellular matrix (ECM) structure were assessed by H&amp;E and Movat pentachrome stains. Tissues were also immunostained for multiple ECM components and turnover mediators. After 2 weeks of culture, proliferating cells were distributed throughout the tissue in segments cultured in the bioreactor, in contrast to segments cultured without mechanical stimulation. Most ECM components, especially collagen types I and III, better maintained normal expression patterns and magnitudes (as found in baseline controls) over 2 weeks of dynamic organ culture compared to static culture. Lack of mechanical stimulation changed several aspects of the tissue microstructure, including the cell distribution and ECM locations. In conclusion, mechanical stimulation by the bioreactor maintained tissue integrity, which will enable future in vitro investigation of mitral valve remodeling.<newchar><newabs>15539485<newchar>The assembly and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules are crucial processes during bone development. In this study, we show that ECM remodeling is a critical rate-limiting step in endochondral bone formation. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 13 (collagenase 3) is poised to play a crucial role in bone formation and remodeling because of its expression both in terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes in the growth plate and in osteoblasts. Moreover, a mutation in the human MMP13 gene causes the Missouri variant of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia. Inactivation of Mmp13 in mice through homologous recombination led to abnormal skeletal growth plate development. Chondrocytes differentiated normally but their exit from the growth plate was delayed. The severity of the Mmp13- null growth plate phenotype increased until about 5 weeks and completely resolved by 12 weeks of age. Mmp13-null mice had increased trabecular bone, which persisted for months. Conditional inactivation of Mmp13 in chondrocytes and osteoblasts showed that increases in trabecular bone occur independently of the improper cartilage ECM degradation caused by Mmp13 deficiency in late hypertrophic chondrocytes. Our studies identified the two major components of the cartilage ECM, collagen type II and aggrecan, as in vivo substrates for MMP13. We found that degradation of cartilage collagen and aggrecan is a coordinated process in which MMP13 works synergistically with MMP9. Mice lacking both MMP13 and MMP9 had severely impaired endochondral bone, characterized by diminished ECM remodeling, prolonged chondrocyte survival, delayed vascular recruitment and defective trabecular bone formation (resulting in drastically shortened bones). These data support the hypothesis that proper ECM remodeling is the dominant rate-limiting process for programmed cell death, angiogenesis and osteoblast recruitment during normal skeletal morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21415544<newchar>Aberrant extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in sebaceous glands and pilosebaceous units in the skin is associated with scar formation under acne conditions. To investigate the involvement of Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes), a Gram-positive anaerobic microbial species, in ECM remodeling in sebaceous glands and pilosebaceous units, we examined the effects of P. acnes culture media, formalin-fixed P. acnes, and peptidoglycan (PGN) from Gram-positive bacteria walls on the production of promatrix metalloproteinase 2 (proMMP-2)/progelatinase A in hamster sebocytes and dermal fibroblasts. When hamster sebocytes (1.8×10(5) cells) and dermal fibroblasts (1×10(5) cells) were treated with P. acnes culture media and formalin-fixed P. acnes (corresponding to 1×10(6) and 1×10(7) bacterial cells), the production of proMMP-2 was augmented. In addition, PGN (5-50 µg/ml) dose-dependently augmented the production of proMMP-2 in both cells. Furthermore, the PGN (50 µg/ml)-augmented proMMP-2 production was resulted from an increase of its transcript. In contrast, there were no changes in cell proliferative activity in either the P. acnes or PGN-treated sebocytes and dermal fibroblasts, indicating that the augmented proMMP-2 production was not due to an increase in cell numbers. Therefore, these results provide novel evidence that PGN transcriptionally up-regulates the production of proMMP-2 in hamster sebocytes and dermal fibroblasts. Given an increase in the quantity of Gram-positive bacteria, including P. acnes in acne lesions, the aberrant ECM degradation may progress in sebaceous glands and pilosebaceous units, which is associated with acne scar formation.<newchar><newabs>21622965<newchar>This study tested the hypothesis that experimental prediabetes can elicit structural remodelling in the left ventricle (LV). Left ventricles isolated from 8-week-old male Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats and age-matched male Wistar control rats were used to assess remodelling changes and underlying transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ1) activity, prohypertrophic Akt-p70S6K1 signalling and gene expression profile of the extracellular matrix (ECM) using histological, immunohistochemical, immunoblotting and quantitative gene expression analyses. Prediabetes in GK rats was confirmed by impaired glucose tolerance and modestly elevated fasting blood glucose. Left ventricle remodelling in the GK rat presented with marked hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes and increased ECM deposition that together translated into increased heart size in the absence of ultrastructural changes or fibre disarray. Molecular derangements underlying this phenotype included recapitulation of the fetal gene phenotype markers B-type natriuretic peptide and α-skeletal muscle actin, activation of the Akt-p70S6K1 pathway and altered gene expression profile of key components (collagen 1α and fibronectin) and modulators of the ECM (matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 and connective tissue growth factor). These changes were correlated with parallel findings of increased TGFβ1 transcription and activation in the LV and elevated active TGFβ1 in plasma of GK rats compared with control animals (Student's t test, P &lt; 0.05 versus age-matched Wistar control animals for all parameters). This is the first report to describe LV structural remodelling in experimental prediabetes. The results suggest that ventricular decompensation pathognomonic of advanced diabetic cardiomyopathy may have possible origins in profibrotic and prohypertrophic mechanisms triggered before the onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus.<newchar><newabs>21044606<newchar>Many fundamental cellular and extracellular processes in the body are mediated by enzymes. At the single molecule level, enzyme activity is influenced by mechanical forces. However, the effects of mechanical forces on the kinetics of enzymatic reactions in complex tissues with intact extracellular matrix (ECM) have not been identified. Here we report that physiologically relevant macroscopic mechanical forces modify enzyme activity at the molecular level in the ECM of the lung parenchyma. Porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE), which binds to and digests elastin, was fluorescently conjugated (f-PPE) and fluorescent recovery after photobleach was used to evaluate the binding kinetics of f-PPE in the alveolar walls of normal mouse lungs. Fluorescent recovery after photobleach indicated that the dissociation rate constant (k(off)) for f-PPE was significantly larger in stretched than in relaxed alveolar walls with a linear relation between k(off) and macroscopic strain. Using a network model of the parenchyma, a linear relation was also found between k(off) and microscopic strain on elastin fibers. Further, the binding pattern of f-PPE suggested that binding sites on elastin unfold with strain. The increased overall reaction rate also resulted in stronger structural breakdown at the level of alveolar walls, as well as accelerated decay of stiffness and decreased failure stress of the ECM at the macroscopic scale. These results suggest an important role for the coupling between mechanical forces and enzyme activity in ECM breakdown and remodeling in development, and during diseases such as pulmonary emphysema or vascular aneurysm. Our findings may also have broader implications because in vivo, enzyme activity in nearly all cellular and extracellular processes takes place in the presence of mechanical forces.<newchar><newabs>19497143<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) in the brain is composed of molecules synthesized and secreted by neurons and glial cells in a cell-type-specific and activity-dependent manner. During development, ECM plays crucial roles in proliferation, migration and differentiation of neural cells. In the mature brain, ECM undergoes a slow turnover and supports multiple physiological processes, while restraining structural plasticity. In the first part of this review, we discuss the contribution of ECM molecules to different forms of plasticity, including developmental plasticity in the cortex, long-term potentiation and depression in the hippocampus, homeostatic scaling of synaptic transmission and metaplasticity. In the second part, we focus on pathological changes associated with epileptogenic mutations in ECM-related molecules or caused by seizure-induced remodeling of ECM. The available data suggest that ECM components regulating physiological plasticity are also engaged in different aspects of epileptogenesis, such as dysregulation of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission, sprouting of mossy fibers, granule cell dispersion and gliosis. At the end, we discuss combinatorial approaches that might be used to counteract seizure-induced dysregulation of both ECM molecules and extracellular proteases. By restraining ECM modification and preserving the status quo in the brain, these treatments might prove to be valid therapeutic interventions to antagonize the progression of epileptogenesis.<newchar><newabs>16583319<newchar>It is known that the extracellular matrix (ECM) is able to signal to cells and thereby direct or modulate the transcription of certain mRNAs. This signaling plays an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis, wound healing, remodeling of the ECM and cell differentiation. There are several mechanisms whereby the ECM signals cells to change their metabolism: (1) receptor molecules binding to specific domains in the ECM, (2) direct phagocytosis of the ECM molecules or domains into the cell, (3) structural changes of the ECM domains. We report the effect of an ECM containing either mutant or normal Fbn1 on the transcription levels of several collagen mRNAs. Tsk/Tsk, Tsk/+ and +/+ mouse embryonic fibroblast cell lines were used. Tsk/Tsk cells produce only mutated fibrillin-1 which arises from mRNA containing an in-frame duplication of exons 17-40. To test the effect of the ECM containing mutant Fbn1, cells of the Tsk/Tsk, Tsk/+ and the wild-type (+/+) genotype were each grown on an ECM produced by either Tsk/Tsk, Tsk/+ cells or by wild-type cells (+/+). The embryonic cells were genotyped by Northern analyses for Fbn1 and grown to confluence. The cultures were then harvested and the cells removed, leaving the matrix in the flasks. Matrices produced from Tsk/Tsk, Tsk/+ and from +/+ cells were reseeded with Tsk/Tsk cells, Tsk/+ cells or +/+ cells. The cells were plated at a confluent concentration and incubated on the matrices for 48 h, after which total RNA was harvested and cDNA generated. Real-time PCR using cDNA or Northern analyses using RNA were performed for Fbn1 and Types I, III and V collagens. The PCR and Northern results were normalized using beta-actin and GAPDH, respectively. The Northern analyses showed that the steady state levels of mRNA for Col1a1 were depressed in both Tsk/Tsk and +/+ cells when grown on the matrix produced by Tsk/Tsk cells. Real-time PCR was then performed with primers specific for Col1a2, Col3a1, Col5a1 and Col5a2. The results showed that cells with the Tsk/Tsk, Tsk/+, and +/+ genotype all had lower steady-state levels of the above 4 collagen mRNAs when grown on the matrix produced by homozygous Tsk/Tsk cells or the matrix produced by heterozygous Tsk/+ cells compared with those grown on a matrix produced by +/+ cells. We hypothesize that the mutated Fbn1 molecules with many additional EGF-calcium binding regions and TGF-beta binding domains may (1) change the homeostasis of the ECM by binding additional growth factors and/or (2) present a radically different ECM 3-dimensional architecture. Either or both of these changes could signal the cell to produce less collagen.<newchar><newabs>12031112<newchar>Extracellular matrices (ECM) derived from porcine tissue are associated with rapid and extensive repopulation with host cells when used as scaffolds for in vivo tissue repair. Cell adhesion to substrates used for tissue engineering has been studied extensively but the factors that mediate this phenomenon in ECM scaffolds following treatment with oxidants and sterilants have not been examined. Cell adhesion assays were used to examine human microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC) attachment to ECM graft materials harvested from small intestinal submucosa (SIS) and urinary bladder matrix (UBM) following decellularization and sterilization procedures designed to render the ECM safe for clinical use. HMECs were able to attach directly to these ECM scaffolds via several attachment proteins present within the ECM, including type I collagen, type IV collagen, and fibronectin. The ability of the SIS ECM and UBM ECM to support the growth and proliferation of HMEC was also examined. HMEC were able to grow to single-layer confluence on both surfaces of SIS and UBM sheets. The endothelial cells were also able to penetrate the SIS and UBM at later time points if they were seeded on the abluminal side of the ECM sheets. The ability of the processed ECM to support HMEC attachment and proliferation is similar to that reported for unprocessed ECM and may therefore play a role in the rapid remodeling response observed when these matrices are implanted in vivo as scaffolds for wound repair.<newchar><newabs>17013807<newchar>Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are characterized by chronic airway inflammation and major structural lung tissue changes including increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. Inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) are the basic treatment for both diseases, but their effect on airway remodeling remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the effect of corticosteroids and LABA, alone or in combination, on total ECM and collagen deposition, gene expression, cell proliferation, and IL-6, IL-8, and TGF-beta(1) levels by primary human lung fibroblasts. In our model, fibroblasts in 0.3% albumin represented a non-inflammatory condition and stimulation with 5% FCS and/or TGF-beta(1) mimicked an inflammatory environment with activation of tissue repair. FCS (5%) increased total ECM, collagen deposition, cell proliferation, and IL-6, IL-8, and TGF-beta(1) levels. In 0.3% albumin, corticosteroids reduced total ECM and collagen deposition, involving the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and downregulation of collagen, heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47), and Fli1 mRNA expression. In 5% FCS, corticosteroids increased ECM deposition, involving upregulation of COL4A1 and CTGF mRNA expression. LABA reduced total ECM and collagen deposition under all conditions partly via the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor. In combination, the drugs had an additive effect in the presence or absence of TGF-beta(1) further decreasing ECM deposition in 0.3% albumin whereas counteracting each other in 5% FCS. These data suggest that the effect of corticosteroids, but not of LABA, on ECM deposition by fibroblasts is altered by serum. These findings imply that as soon as airway inflammation is resolved, long-term treatment with combined drugs may beneficially reduce pathological tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16579685<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) has been successfully used as a scaffold for constructive remodeling of multiple tissues in both preclinical studies and in human clinical applications. The basement membrane is a specialized form of the ECM that supports and facilitates the growth of epithelial cell populations. The morphology and the molecular composition of the ECM, including the basement membrane, vary depending upon the organ from which the ECM is harvested and the methods by which it is processed for use as a medical device. Processing steps, such as decellularization, lyophilization, disinfection, and terminal sterilization, may affect the morphology and composition of an ECM scaffold, including, but not limited to, the integrity of a basement membrane complex. The present study evaluated the presence and integrity of a basement membrane complex in processed ECM derived from three different tissues: the urinary bladder, small intestine, and liver. Immunohistochemical determination of the presence and localization of three basement membrane molecules, collagen IV, laminin, and collagen VII, was conducted for each ECM scaffold. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to further explore the surface ultrastructure of selected ECM scaffolds. The effect of a surface basement membrane presence upon the pattern of in vitro growth of two separate cell types, NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC), was also evaluated for each ECM scaffold. Results showed that the only intact basement membrane complex was found on the luminal surface of the ECM derived from the urinary bladder and that the basement membrane was an effective barrier to penetration of the scaffold by the seeded cells. We conclude that the urinary bladder ECM but not the small intestine- or liver-derived ECM contains a surface with composition and morphology consistent with that of an intact basement membrane complex, that the basement membrane complex can survive processing, and that the basement membrane structure can modulate in vitro cell growth patterns.<newchar><newabs>23251524<newchar>Flexor tendon injuries are among the most challenging problems for hand surgeons and tissue engineers alike. Not only do flexor tendon injuries heal with poor mechanical strength, they can also form debilitating adhesions that may permanently impair hand function. While TGF-β1 is a necessary factor for regaining tendon strength, it is associated with scar and adhesion formation in the flexor tendons and other tissues as well as fibrotic diseases. The pleiotropic effects of TGF-β1 on tendon cells and tissue have not been characterized in detail. The goal of the present study was to identify the targets through which the effects of TGF-β1 on tendon healing could be altered. To accomplish this, we treated flexor tendon tenocytes cultured in pinned collagen gels with 1, 10 or 100 ng/mL of TGF-β1 and measured gel contraction and gene expression using RT-PCR up to 48 hours after treatment. Specifically, we studied the effects of TGF-β1 on the expression of collagens, fibronectin, proteoglycans, MMPs, MMP inhibitors, and the neotendon transcription factors, Scleraxis and Mohawk. Area contraction of the gels was not dose-dependent with the TGF-β1 concentrations tested. We observed dose-dependent downregulation of MMP-16 (MT3-MMP) and decorin, and upregulation of biglycan, collagen V, collagen XII, PAI-1, Scleraxis, and Mohawk by TGF-β1. Inter-gene analyses were also performed to further characterize the expression of ECM and MMP genes in the tenocyte-seeded collagen gels. These analyses illustrate that TGF-β1 tilts the balance of gene expression in favor of ECM synthesis rather than the matrix-remodeling MMPs, a possible means by which TGF-β1 promotes adhesion formation.<newchar><newabs>22348081<newchar>Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, a desmoplastic disease, is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in the Western world due, in large part, to locally invasive primary tumor growth and ensuing metastasis. SPARC is a matricellular protein that governs extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and maturation during tissue remodeling, particularly, during wound healing and tumorigenesis. In the present study, we sought to determine the mechanism by which lack of host SPARC alters the tumor microenvironment and enhances invasion and metastasis of an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer. We identified that levels of active TGFβ1 were increased significantly in tumors grown in SPARC-null mice. TGFβ1 contributes to many aspects of tumor development including metastasis, endothelial cell permeability, inflammation and fibrosis, all of which are altered in the absence of stromal-derived SPARC. Given these results, we performed a survival study to assess the contribution of increased TGFβ1 activity to tumor progression in SPARC-null mice using losartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist that diminishes TGFβ1 expression and activation in vivo. Tumors grown in SPARC-null mice progressed more quickly than those grown in wild-type littermates leading to a significant reduction in median survival. However, median survival of SPARC-null animals treated with losartan was extended to that of losartan-treated wild-type controls. In addition, losartan abrogated TGFβ induced gene expression, reduced local invasion and metastasis, decreased vascular permeability and altered the immune profile of tumors grown in SPARC-null mice. These data support the concept that aberrant TGFβ1-activation in the absence of host SPARC contributes significantly to tumor progression and suggests that SPARC, by controlling ECM deposition and maturation, can regulate TGFβ availability and activation.<newchar><newabs>22888421<newchar>Cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for cell migration, proliferation, and embryonic development. Cells can contact the ECM through a wide range of matrix contact structures such as focal adhesions, podosomes, and invadopodia. Although they are different in structural design and basic function, they share common remodeling proteins such as integrins, talin, paxillin, and the tyrosine kinases FAK, Pyk2, and Src. In this paper, we compare and contrast the basic organization and role of focal adhesions, podosomes, and invadopodia in different cells. In addition, we discuss the role of the tyrosine kinases, FAK, Pyk2, and Src, which are critical for the function of the different adhesion structures. Finally, we discuss the essential role of these tyrosine kinases from the perspective of human diseases.<newchar><newabs>22937161<newchar>Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) infection is one of the most common etiological factors involved in fibrosis development and its progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The pivotal role of hepatic stellate cells (HCSs) and extracellular matrix (ECM) in fibrogenesis is now certainly accepted, while the network of molecular interactions connecting HCV is emerging as a master regulator of several biological processes including proliferation, inflammation, cytoskeleton and ECM remodeling. In this study, the effects of HCV proteins expression on liver cancer cells, both pro-invasive and pro-fibrogenic phenotypes were explored. As a model of HCV infection, we used permissive Huh7.5.1 hepatoma cells infected with JFH1-derived ccHCV. Conditioned medium from these cells was used to stimulate LX-2 cells, a line of HSCs. We found that the HCV infection of Huh7.5.1 cells decreased adhesion, increased migration and caused the delocalization of alpha-actinin from plasma membrane to cytoplasm and increased expression levels of paxillin. The treatment of LX-2 cells, with conditioned medium from HCV-infected Huh7.5.1 cells, caused an increase in cell proliferation, expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin, hyaluronic acid release and apoptosis rate measured as cleaved poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP). These effects were accompanied in Huh7.5.1 cells by an HCV-dependent increasing of FAK activation that physically interacts with phosphorylated paxillin and alpha-actinin, and a rising of tumor necrosis factor alpha production/release. Silencing of FAK by siRNA reverted all effects of HCV infection, both those directed on Huh7.5.1 cells, and those indirect effects on the LX-2 cells. Moreover and interestingly, FAK inhibition enhances apoptosis in HCV-conditioned LX-2 cells. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that HCV, through FAK activation, may promote cytoskeletal reorganization and a pro-oncogenic phenotype in hepatocyte-like cells, and a fibrogenic phenotype in HSCs.<newchar><newabs>23259796<newchar>Lung fibrosis is the final common pathway of a large variety of chronic lung disorders, named interstitial lung diseases. The most aggressive form is the idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [IPF] characterized by alveolar epithelial cell injury/activation, expansion of the fibroblast/myofibroblast population, and the exaggerated accumulation of extracellular matrix [ECM] components which ultimately result in the destruction of the lung parenchyma. Several matrix metalloproteases [MMPs] are upregulated in the IPF lungs and have been shown to actively participate in the pathogenesis of the disease through extracellular matrix remodeling and basement membrane disruption. However, MMPs can also breakdown molecules that mediate cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions, and can activate growth factors and growth factor receptors indicating that they likely contribute to other local biopathological processes such as apoptosis, migration, proliferation and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21506694<newchar>The aim of this review is to discuss the potential usefulness of a novel class of biochemical markers, designated neoepitopes. Neoepitopes are post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins and are derived by processes, such as protease cleavage, citrullination, nitrosylation, glycosylation and isomerization. Each PTM results from a specific local physiological or pathobiological process. Identification of each modification to a tissue-specific protein may reveal a unique disease-specific biochemical marker. During cancer metastasis, the host tissue is extensively degraded and replaced by cancer-associated extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Furthermore, severe cellular stress and inflammation, caused by cancer, results in generation of PTMs, which will be distributed throughout the ECM. This gives rise to release of protein-specific fragments to the circulation. Here we highlight the importance of remodeling of the ECM in cancer and the generation of PTMs, which may be cancer specific and reflect disease progression; thus having potential for biochemical marker development.<newchar><newabs>22137664<newchar>Atherogenesis refers to the development of atheromatous plaques in the inner lining of the arteries. These atherosclerotic lesions are characterized by accumulation of monocyte-derived macrophage-foam cells loaded with cholesterol, which eventually undergo apoptotic death, leading finally to formation of the necrotic core of the plaque. Atheroma formation also involves the recruitment of smooth muscle cells (SMC) from the media into the intima, where they proliferate and form the neointima in a process called &quot;remodeling&quot;. Cells in the advanced atherosclerotic plaques express high levels of the serine protease urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR). uPA is a multi-functional multi-domain protein that is not only a regulator of fibrinolysis, but it is also associated with several acute and chronic pathologic conditions. uPA mediate the extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, and plays a pivotal role in cell adhesion, migration and proliferation, during tissue remodeling. On cell surface uPA binds to the high affinity urokinase receptor, providing a strictly localized proteolysis of ECM proteins. The uPA/uPAR complex also activates intracellular signaling, thus regulating cellular function. An imbalance in the uPA/uPAR system leads to dis-orders in tissue structure and function. This review summarizes recent progress in understanding the role and mechanisms of the uPA/uPAR system in atherogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21360755<newchar>Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) are unique glia found only in the olfactory system. They retain exceptional plasticity and support olfactory neurogenesis and retargeting across the PNS:CNS boundary in the olfactory system. OECs have been shown to improve functional outcome when transplanted into rodents with spinal cord injury. The growth-promoting properties of implanted OECs encompass their ability to migrate through the scar tissue and render it more permissive for axonal outgrowth, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. OECs appear to regulate molecules of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that inhibit axonal growth. Among the proteins that have the potential to promote cell migration, axonal regeneration and remodeling of the ECM are matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of endopeptidases that cleave matrix, soluble, and membrane-bound proteins and that are regulated by their endogenous inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs). Little is known about MMP/TIMP trafficking, secretion, and role in OECs. Using a combination of cell biology, biochemistry, pharmacology, and imaging techniques, we show that MMP-2 and MMP-9 are expressed and proteolytically active in the olfactory epithelium and in particular in the OECs of the lamina propria. These proteinases and regulatory proteins such as MT1-MMP and TIMP-2 are expressed in cultured OECs. MMPs exhibit nuclear localization and vesicular trafficking and secretion, with distribution along microtubules and microfilaments and co-localization with the molecular motor protein kinesin. Finally, we show that MMPs are involved in migration of OECs in vitro on different ECM substrates.<newchar><newabs>24710532<newchar>Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BM-MSCs) represent the leading candidate cell in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. These cells can be easily isolated, expanded in vitro and are capable of providing significant functional benefits after implantation in the damaged muscle tissues. Despite their plasticity, the participation of BM-MSCs to new muscle fiber formation is controversial; in fact, emerging evidence indicates that their therapeutic effects occur without signs of long-term tissue engraftment and involve the paracrine secretion of cytokines and growth factors with multiple effects on the injured tissue, including modulation of inflammation and immune reaction, positive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, angiogenesis and protection from apoptosis. Recently, a new role for BM-MSCs in the stimulation of muscle progenitor cells proliferation has been demonstrated, suggesting the potential ability of these cells to influence the fate of local stem cells and augment the endogenous mechanisms of repair/regeneration in the damaged tissues.<newchar><newabs>22363796<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is a critical step in peripheral nerve regeneration. In fact, in human neuropathies, endoneurial ECM enriched in fibrin and vitronectin associates with poor regeneration and worse clinical prognosis. Accordingly in animal models, modification of the fibrinolytic complex activity has profound effects on nerve regeneration: high fibrinolytic activity and low levels of fibrin correlate with better nerve regeneration. The urokinase plasminogen receptor (uPAR) is a major component of the fibrinolytic complex, and binding to urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) promotes fibrinolysis and cell movement. uPAR is expressed in peripheral nerves, however, little is known on its potential function on nerve development and regeneration. Thus, we investigated uPAR null mice and observed that uPAR is dispensable for nerve development, whereas, loss of uPAR affects nerve regeneration. uPAR null mice showed reduced nerve repair after sciatic nerve crush. This was a consequence of reduced fibrinolytic activity and increased deposition of endoneurial fibrin and vitronectin. Exogenous fibrinolysis in uPAR null mice rescued nerve repair after sciatic nerve crush. Finally, we measured the fibrinolytic activity in sural nerve biopsies from patients with peripheral neuropathies. We showed that neuropathies with defective regeneration had reduced fibrinolytic activity. On the contrary, neuropathies with signs of active regeneration displayed higher fibrinolytic activity. Overall, our results suggest that enforced fibrinolysis may facilitate regeneration and outcome of peripheral neuropathies.<newchar><newabs>11323746<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules play important roles in the pathobiology of the major human central nervous system (CNS) inflammatory/demyelinating disease multiple sclerosis (MS). This mini-review highlights some recent work on CNS endothelial cell interactions with vascular basement membrane ECM as part of the cellular immune response, and roles for white matter ECM molecules in demyelination and remyelination in MS lesions. Recent basic and clinical investigations of MS emphasize axonal injury, not only in chronic MS plaques, but also in acute lesions; progressive axonal degeneration in normal-appearing white matter also may contribute to brain and spinal cord atrophy in MS patients. Remodeling of the interstitial white matter ECM molecules that affect axon regeneration, however, is incompletely characterized. Our ongoing immunohistochemical studies demonstrate enhanced ECM versican, a neurite and axon growth-inhibiting white matter ECM proteoglycan, and dermatan sulfate proteoglycans at the edges of inflammatory MS lesions. This suggests that enhanced proteoglycan deposition in the ECM and axonal growth inhibition may occur early and are involved in expansion of active lesions. Decreased ECM proteoglycans and their phagocytosis by macrophages along with myelin in plaque centers imply that there is &quot;injury&quot; to the ECM itself. These results indicate that white matter ECM proteoglycan alterations are integral to MS pathology at all disease stages and that they contribute to a CNS ECM that is inhospitable to axon regrowth/regeneration.<newchar><newabs>19416216<newchar>Airway remodeling changes are a key pathological feature of asthma. They are associated with airway hyperresponsiveness and fixed airway obstruction. Aged, relaxin-deficient mice display structural changes resembling airway remodeling in asthma, including thickening of the bronchial epithelium and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the subepithelial region. Relaxin-deficient mice also have exaggerated airway remodeling in models of allergic airway disease compared to wild-type controls. Both in vitro and in vivo studies have suggested that airway fibrosis may drive other changes of airway remodeling, including epithelial changes. A suggested paradigm is that subepithelial fibrosis (deposition of ECM in the basement membrane region) may lead to increased epithelial cell proliferation and transforming growth factor-beta1 production, which in turn may lead to further fibrosis. Relaxin may therefore prevent or reverse activation of the epithelial and fibroblast remodeling in asthma. Control of epithelial remodeling and ECM production in the airway wall may play an important role in maintaining normal lung function. Understanding how relaxin protects against airway remodeling changes may have important implications in developing new therapies to treat airway remodeling in asthma.<newchar><newabs>14518551<newchar>During evolution of multicellularity it was imperative to create a complex, multifunctional extracellular matrix (ECM) out of the simple cell wall of a unicellular ancestor. The green alga Volvox represents one of the simplest multicellular organisms, but even so, it already has a highly developed ECM. This ECM is mainly composed of an assortment of glycoproteins, many of which are hydroxyproline rich and extensively sulfated. Several ECM proteins are cross-linked and might have only structural functions. However, the ECM does not represent a static but rather a dynamic and multifunctional interface between a cell and its neighboring cells or its environment. It not only provides protection and structural support for the shape of each cell and the organism as a whole, but also plays a broad range of biological roles in growth, development, reproduction, and responses to environmental stress or wounding. The variety of functions of the ECM requires many glycoproteins to do the work. To attain a high flexibility and adaptability, almost all ECM glycoproteins from Volvox consist of modules, defined as functional subunits that form modular mosaic proteins with an outstanding combinatorial potential. The ECM's functions are not only extensive but also change under developmental control or by environmental incidents. The changing scope of duties necessitates a permanent ECM turnover and remodeling. In Volvox carteri one particularly challenging trigger of such ECM modifications is a sex-inducing pheromone, which is one of the most potent biological effector molecules known: the glycoprotein pheromone is fully effective for inducing sexual development in males and females at concentrations as low as 10(-16) M. The earliest detectable response to the pheromone is the synthesis of ECM glycoproteins.<newchar><newabs>22484495<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteases responsible for remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) and enabling spreading and metastasis of tumor cells, a common phenomenon in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC). They are strongly blocked by several inhibitors, among which we must highlight, for their specificity and potency, the endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1, -2, -3 and -4). The goal of this paper is to describe the expression of TIMPs in OSCC, determining their relation with clinical, histological and prognostic factors, delving into OSCC regulation mechanisms and discussing the use of exogenous TIMPs to treat this type of tumors. Expression of TIMPs in OSCC is higher in tumors than in normal tissue, which correlates with an increase of metastatic risk and regional lymph node affectation. Although some metalloproteinases inhibitors (MMIs) have shown promising results in the treatment of these tumors, their use in OSCC has not been widely tested; and although some indirect MMIs, like COX-2 inhibitors, flavonoids and endostatin seem to have beneficial effects on the invasive capacity of OSCC through regulation of MMPs and TIMP levels, routine clinical use has not been accepted yet.<newchar><newabs>22157886<newchar>A defining characteristic of cancer malignancy is invasion and metastasis. In some cancers (e.g. glioma), local invasion into surrounding healthy tissue is the root cause of disease and death. For other cancers (e.g. breast, lung, etc.), it is the process of metastasis, in which tumor cells move from a primary tumor mass, colonize distal sites and ultimately contribute to organ failure, that eventually leads to morbidity and mortality. It has been estimated that invasion and metastasis are responsible for 90% of cancer deaths. As a result, there has been intense interest in identifying the molecular processes and critical protein mediators of invasion and metastasis for the purposes of improving diagnosis and treatment. A challenge for cancer scientists is to develop invasion assays that sufficiently resemble the in vivo situation to enable accurate disease modeling. Two-dimensional cell motility assays are only informative about one aspect of invasion and do not take into account extracellular matrix (ECM) protein remodeling which is also a critical element. Recently, research has refined our understanding of tumor cell invasion and revealed that individual cells may move by elongated or rounded modes. In addition, there has been greater appreciation of the contribution of collective invasion, in which cells invade in strands, sheets and clusters, particularly in highly differentiated tumors that maintain epithelial characteristics, to the spread of cancer. We present a refined method for examining the contributions of candidate proteins to collective invasion. In particular, by engineering separate pools of cells to express different fluorescent proteins, it is possible to molecularly dissect the activities and proteins required in leading cells versus those required in following cells. The use of RNAi provides the molecular tool to experimentally disassemble the processes involved in individual cell invasion as well as in different positions of collective invasion. In this procedure, mixtures of fluorescently-labeled cells are plated on the bottom of a Transwell insert previously filled with Matrigel ECM protein, then allowed to invade &quot;upwards&quot; through the filter and into the Matrigel. Reconstruction of z-series image stacks, obtained by confocal imaging, into three-dimensional representations allows for visualization of collectively invading strands and analysis of the representation of fluorescently-labeled cells in leading versus following positions.<newchar><newabs>14722904<newchar>Biophysical stimulation to enhance bone fracture repair and bone regenerate maturation to restore its structural strength must rely on both the biological and biomechanical principle according to the local tissue environment and the type of mechanical stress to be born by the skeletal joint system. This paper reviews the possible interactions between biophysical stimuli and cellular responses in healing bone fractures and proceeds to speculate the prospects and limitations of different experimental models in evaluating and optimising such non-invasive interventions. It is important to realize that bone fracture repair has several pathways with various combinations of bone formation mechanisms, but there may only be one bone remodeling principle regulated by the hypothesis proposed by Wolff. There are different mechanical and biophysical stimuli that could provide effective augmentation of fracture healing and bone regenerate maturation. The key requirements of establishing these positive interactions are to define the precise cellular response to the stimulation signal in an in vitro environment and to use well-established animal models to quantify and optimise the therapeutic regimen in a time-dependent manner. This can only be achieved through research collaboration among different disciplines using scientific methodologies. In addition, the specific forms of biophysical stimulation and its dose effect and application timing must be carefully determined and validated. Technological advances in achieving focalized stimulus delivery with adjustable signal type and intensity, in the ability to monitor healing callus mechanical property non-invasively, and in the establishment of a robust knowledge base to develop effective and reliable treatment protocols are the essential pre-requisites to make biophysical stimulation acceptable in the main arena of health care. Finally, it is important to bear in mind that successful fracture repair or bone regeneration through callus distraction without adequate remodeling process through physiological loading would seriously undermine the value of biophysical stimulation in meeting the biomechanical demand of a long bone.<newchar><newabs>20601294<newchar>Bone remodeling is a delicate balancing act between the bone matrix synthesizing osteoblasts and bone resorbing osteoclasts. Active bone metastases typically subvert this process to generate lesions that are comprised of extensive areas of pathological osteogenesis and osteolysis. The resultant increase in bone matrix remodeling enhances cytokine/growth factor bioavailability thus creating a vicious cycle that stimulates tumor progression. Given the extent of matrix remodeling occurring in the tumor-bone microenvironment, the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) would be expected, since collectively they have the ability to degrade all components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). However, in addition to being &quot;matrix bulldozers&quot;, MMPs control the bioavailability and bioactivity of factors such as RANKL and TGFβ that have been described as crucial for tumor-bone interaction, thus implicating MMPs as key regulators of the vicious cycle of bone metastases.<newchar><newabs>22808079<newchar>Fibroblasts residing in connective tissues throughout the body are responsible for extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis and repair. In response to tissue damage, they activate to become myofibroblasts, which have organized contractile cytoskeletons and produce a myriad of proteins for ECM remodeling. However, persistence of myofibroblasts can lead to fibrosis with excessive collagen deposition and tissue stiffening. Thus, understanding which signals regulate de-activation of myofibroblasts during normal tissue repair is critical. Substrate modulus has recently been shown to regulate fibrogenic properties, proliferation and apoptosis of fibroblasts isolated from different organs. However, few studies track the cellular responses of fibroblasts to dynamic changes in the microenvironmental modulus. Here, we utilized a light-responsive hydrogel system to probe the fate of valvular myofibroblasts when the Young's modulus of the substrate was reduced from ~32 kPa, mimicking pre-calcified diseased tissue, to ~7 kPa, mimicking healthy cardiac valve fibrosa. After softening the substrata, valvular myofibroblasts de-activated with decreases in α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) stress fibers and proliferation, indicating a dormant fibroblast state. Gene signatures of myofibroblasts (including α-SMA and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)) were significantly down-regulated to fibroblast levels within 6 hours of in situ substrate elasticity reduction while a general fibroblast gene vimentin was not changed. Additionally, the de-activated fibroblasts were in a reversible state and could be re-activated to enter cell cycle by growth stimulation and to express fibrogenic genes, such as CTGF, collagen 1A1 and fibronectin 1, in response to TGF-β1. Our data suggest that lowering substrate modulus can serve as a cue to down-regulate the valvular myofibroblast phenotype resulting in a predominantly quiescent fibroblast population. These results provide insight in designing hydrogel substrates with physiologically relevant stiffness to dynamically redirect cell fate in vitro.<newchar><newabs>22869556<newchar>Aberrant activation of Cyclin D-Cdk4/6 signaling pathway is commonly found in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Here, we show that PD-0332991, a highly specific inhibitor for Cdk4 and Cdk6, exerted growth inhibitory effects on three human PDAC cell lines. Microarray analysis revealed that PD-0332991 downregulated cell-cycle-related genes, but upregulated genes implicated in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and pancreatic cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Moreover, PD-0332991 enhanced invasion in TGF-β-responsive PDAC cell lines that harbor a wild-type SMAD4 gene (COLO-357, PANC-1), but not in TGF-β-resistant AsPC-1 cells that harbor a mutated SMAD4. PD-0332991 also induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in COLO-357 and PANC-1, but not in AsPC-1 cells. Inhibition of CDK4/6 using shRNA mimicked the effects of PD-0332991 on EMT induction. Furthermore, PD-0332991 increased Smad transcriptional activity in luciferase readout assays and activated TGF-β signaling. SB-505124, an inhibitor of the type-I TGF-β receptor (TβRI) kinase, completely blocked EMT induction by PD-0332991. When combined with PD-0332991, SB-505124 inhibited the growth of COLO-357 and PANC-1 cells. Taken together, these data suggest that anti-Cdk4/6 therapy could induce EMT and enhance pancreatic cancer cell invasion by activating Smad-dependent TGF-β signaling, and that combining PD-0332991 and SB-505124 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy in PDAC.<newchar><newabs>21277196<newchar>The emergence of astroglia as an important participant of the synaptic machinery has led to the 'tripartite synapse' hypothesis. Recent findings suggest that synaptic signaling also involves the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM can incorporate and store molecular traces of both neuronal and glial activities. It can also modulate function of local receptors or ion channels and send diffuse molecular signals using products of its use-dependent proteolytic cleavage. Recent experimental findings implicate the ECM in mechanisms of synaptic plasticity and glial remodeling, thus lending support to the 'tetrapartite synapse' concept. This inclusive view might help to understand better the mechanisms underlying signal integration and novel forms of long-term homeostatic regulation in the brain.<newchar><newabs>20637190<newchar>Thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) superfamily members regulate diverse biological activities ranging from cell motility to inhibition of angiogenesis. In this study, we verified that mouse protein O-fucosyltransferase-2 (POFUT2) specifically adds O-fucose to TSRs. Using two Pofut2 gene-trap lines, we demonstrated that O-fucosylation of TSRs was essential for restricting epithelial to mesenchymal transition in the primitive streak, correct patterning of mesoderm, and localization of the definitive endoderm. Although Pofut2 mutant embryos established anterior/posterior polarity, they underwent extensive mesoderm differentiation at the expense of maintaining epiblast pluripotency. Moreover, mesoderm differentiation was biased towards the vascular endothelial cell lineage. Localization of Foxa2 and Cer1 expressing cells within the interior of Pofut2 mutant embryos suggested that POFUT2 activity was also required for the displacement of the primitive endoderm by definitive endoderm. Notably, Nodal, BMP4, Fgf8, and Wnt3 expression were markedly elevated and expanded in Pofut2 mutants, providing evidence that O-fucose modification of TSRs was essential for modulation of growth factor signaling during gastrulation. The ability of Pofut2 mutant embryos to form teratomas comprised of tissues from all three germ layer origins suggested that defects in Pofut2 mutant embryos resulted from abnormalities in the extracellular environment. This prediction is consistent with the observation that POFUT2 targets are constitutive components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) or associate with the ECM. For this reason, the Pofut2 mutants represent a valuable tool for studying the role of O-fucosylation in ECM synthesis and remodeling, and will be a valuable model to study how post-translational modification of ECM components regulates the formation of tissue boundaries, cell movements, and signaling.<newchar><newabs>22500185<newchar>Background. Persistent asthma is characterized by airway remodeling. Whereas we have previously shown that neither β(2)-agonists nor corticosteroids inhibit extracellular matrix (ECM) protein release from airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells, the effect of their combination is unknown and this forms the rationale for the present study. Methods. ASM cells from people with and without asthma were stimulated with TGFβ1 (1 ng/ml) with or without budesonide (10(-8) M) and formoterol (10(-10) and 10(-8) M), and fibronectin expression and IL-6 release were measured by ELISA. Bronchial rings from nonasthmatic individuals were incubated with TGFβ1 (1 ng/ml) with or without the drugs, and fibronectin expression was measured using immunohistochemistry. Results. Budesonide stimulated fibronectin deposition, in the presence or absence of TGFβ1, and this was partially reversed by formoterol (10(-8) M) in both asthmatic and nonasthmatic cells. Budesonide and formoterol in combination failed to inhibit TGFβ-induced fibronectin in either cell type. A similar pattern of expression of fibronectin was seen in bronchial rings. TGFβ1-induced IL-6 release was inhibited by the combination of drugs. Conclusion. Current combination asthma therapies are unable to prevent or reverse remodeling events regulated by ASM cells.<newchar><newabs>22952682<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a physiologically and developmentally essential process mediated by a family of zinc-dependent extracellular proteases called matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). In addition to complex transcriptional control, MMPs are subject to extensive post-translational regulation. Because of this, classical biochemical, molecular and histological techniques that detect the expression of specific gene products provide useful but limited data regarding the biologically relevant activity of MMPs. Using benzophenone-bearing hydroxamate-based probes that interact with the catalytic zinc ion in MMPs, active proteases can be covalently 'tagged' by UV cross-linking. This approach has been successfully used to tag MMP-2 in vitro in tissue culture supernatants, and we show here that this probe tags proteins with mobilities consistent with known MMPs and detectable gelatinolytic activity in homogenates of zebrafish embryos. Furthermore, because of the transparency of the zebrafish embryo, UV-photocroslinking can be accomplished in vivo, and rhodamated benzophenone probe is detected in striking spatial patterns consistent with known distributions of active matrix remodeling in embryos. Finally, in metamorphosing Xenopus tadpoles, this probe can be used to biotinylate active MMP-2 by injecting it and cross-linking it in vivo, allowing the protein to be subsequently extracted and biochemically identified.<newchar><newabs>20628826<newchar>Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common problem in aged men; however, the molecular events involved in aging ED remain unclear. To better characterize the effects of aging in the penis, we evaluated cavernosal tissue remodeling capability and the downstream activation of the intracellular signaling mediator mitogen-activated protein p42/44 kinase (p42/44 MAPK). We used male Wistar rats, which were divided in groups of 2, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months old. Penile tissues were harvested and processed for protein isolation and immunohistochemical analysis. Cavernosal viability was assessed by TUNEL assay, and proliferation was analyzed by immunohistochemical detection of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Immunolocalization of the activated form of p42/44 MAPK was evaluated by immunofluorescence, and changes in its phosphorylation status were quantified by western blotting. p42/44 phosphorylation profile was also assessed in situ in human young and elderly cavernosal samples. With the advancement of age, experimental cavernosal tissue remodeling was affected by an age-dependent unbalance between the rate of apoptosis and proliferation, in all erectile components. Moreover, this turnover alteration was accompanied by significant modifications in the activation profile of the downstream effector p42/44 MAPK. In the youngest corporeal samples, p42/44 was mostly activated at perivascular sites, potentially mediating cell survival/proliferation. However, in elderly experimental erectile tissue, p42/44 phosphorylation shifted to trabecular fibroblasts, indicating a potential role in extracellular matrix (ECM) production. More importantly, the same differential pattern of p42/44 activation was observed in human young and aged cavernosal fragments, suggesting a distinct function of this protein with aging. We provided evidence for the first time that with the advancement of age, there is a differential activation of p42/44 MAPK in cavernosal tissue, which may promote ECM expansion and fibrosis, therefore compromising erectile function in the elderly.<newchar><newabs>22642188<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix is crucial for many physiological (cell migration, proliferation, growth, and development) and pathological (remodeling of heart, carcinogenesis, metastasis, etc.) events. Thus, the interaction between cells and extracellular matrix plays a key role in normal development and differentiation of organism and many pathological states as well. Changes in extracellular matrix are regulated by a system of proteolytic enzymes that are responsible for proteolysis of huge quantity of extracellular matrix components. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) represent the main group of regulating proteases in ECM. Ability of matrix metalloproteinases to modify the structural integrity of tissues is essential for certain aspects of normal physiology and pathology. The ability to process molecules such as growth factors, receptors, adhesion molecules, other proteinases, and proteinase inhibitors makes MMPs potent controllers of physiological and pathological events in the cell microenvironment. Overactivation of MMPs has been implicated in numerous disease states.<newchar><newabs>23367453<newchar>The heart valve tissue mainly contains collagen fibers and valve interstitial cells (VICs) and constantly experiences different stress states during cardiac cycles. Due to the anisotropic architecture of collagen fibers and highly inhomogeneous cell population, the mechanical behavior of the heart valve becomes more complicated. It is known that external mechanical stimuli can lead to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, cellular mechanotransduction, cell migration, and collagen synthesis; however, the mechanism of matrix-to-cell stress transfer remains unclear. Current study presents heterogeneously distributed collagen fibers responsible for transmitting forces into cells by an image-based finite element analysis incorporating histological photomicrographs of porcine heart valve tissues. Besides, nonlinear and anisotropic material properties tissue models are incorporated to quantify and visualize the overall stress distributions in heart valve tissues. By establishing an effectively predictive method with new computational tools and by performing virtual experiments on the heart valves, the role of load transmission in heart valves is clarified. The current study completely illustrates the stress distribution around cells and demonstrates the force transmission and reception between cells and matrix in the heart valve tissue. Therefore, our developed image-based finite element models provide new insights not only into clarifying the role of the force transmission and reception between heterogeneously distributed collagen fibers, but also a better understanding of relationships between the mechanical stimuli, cellular mechanotransduction, cell migration, matrix synthesis, and tissue remodeling in heart valves.<newchar><newabs>22908306<newchar>Directional cell migration requires force generation that relies on the coordinated remodeling of interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM), which is mediated by integrin-based focal adhesions (FAs). Normal FA turnover requires dynamic microtubules, and three members of the diverse group of microtubule plus-end-tracking proteins are principally involved in mediating microtubule interactions with FAs. Microtubules also alter the assembly state of FAs by modulating Rho GTPase signaling, and recent evidence suggests that microtubule-mediated clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis regulates FA dynamics. In addition, FA-associated microtubules may provide a polarized microtubule track for localized secretion of matrix metalloproteases (MMPs). Thus, different aspects of the molecular mechanisms by which microtubules control FA turnover in migrating cells are beginning to emerge.<newchar><newabs>20551380<newchar>The vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for the structural integrity of the vessel wall and also serves as a substrate for the binding and retention of secreted products of vascular cells as well as molecules coming from the circulation. Although proteomics has been previously applied to vascular tissues, few studies have specifically targeted the vascular ECM and its associated proteins. Thus, its detailed composition remains to be characterized. In this study, we describe a methodology for the extraction of extracellular proteins from human aortas and their identification by proteomics. The approach is based on (a) effective decellularization to enrich for scarce extracellular proteins, (b) successful solubilization and deglycosylation of ECM proteins, and (c) relative estimation of protein abundance using spectral counting. Our three-step extraction approach resulted in the identification of 103 extracellular proteins of which one-third have never been reported in the proteomics literature of vascular tissues. In particular, three glycoproteins (podocan, sclerostin, and agrin) were identified for the first time in human aortas at the protein level. We also identified extracellular adipocyte enhancer-binding protein 1, the cartilage glycoprotein asporin, and a previously hypothetical protein, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) spondin. Moreover, our methodology allowed us to screen for proteolysis in the aortic samples based on the identification of proteolytic enzymes and their corresponding degradation products. For instance, we were able to detect matrix metalloproteinase-9 by mass spectrometry and relate its presence to degradation of fibronectin in a clinical specimen. We expect this proteomics methodology to further our understanding of the composition of the vascular extracellular environment, shed light on ECM remodeling and degradation, and provide insights into important pathological processes, such as plaque rupture, aneurysm formation, and restenosis.<newchar><newabs>22580763<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in both atherosclerosis and aneurysm disease. Serine protease inhibitor A3 (serpinA3) is an inhibitor of several proteases such as elastase, cathepsin G and chymase derived from mast cells and neutrophils. In this study, we investigated the putative role of serpinA3 in atherosclerosis and aneurysm formation. SerpinA3 was expressed in endothelial cells and medial smooth muscle cells in human atherosclerotic lesions and a 14-fold increased expression of serpinA3n mRNA was found in lesions from Apoe-/- mice compared to lesion-free vessels. In contrast, decreased mRNA expression (-80%) of serpinA3 was found in biopsies of human abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) compared to non-dilated aortas. Overexpression of serpinA3n in transgenic mice did not influence the development of atherosclerosis or CaCl2-induced aneurysm formation. In situ zymography analysis showed that the transgenic mice had lower cathepsin G and elastase activity, and more elastin in the aortas compared to wild-type mice, which could indicate a more stable aortic phenotype. Differential vascular expression of serpinA3 is clearly associated with human atherosclerosis and AAA but serpinA3 had no major effect on experimentally induced atherosclerosis or AAA development in mouse. However, serpinA3 may be involved in a phenotypic stabilization of the aorta.<newchar><newabs>16944424<newchar>Tumor cells interfere with the normal programming of extracellular matrix (ECM) biosynthesis and can extensively modify the structure and composition of the matrix. The role of ECM components is becoming increasingly recognized as an important determinant for the growth and progression of solid tumors. The extensive remodeling of the normal ECM in tumors can proceed through the degradation of pre-existing ECM molecules and/or by the neosynthesis of ECM components, which in many cases are not present in the ECM of normal tissues. In the ovary the ECM comprises a variety of molecules including the collagen superfamily and noncollagenous proteins such as glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and hyaluronan. Elevated levels of laminin-gamma2, collagen types I and III, fibronectin, syndecan-1, glypican-1, versican, and hyaluronan and its receptors CD44 have all been associated with a poor prognosis of ovarian cancers. Generally, there is a differential expression of laminin chains alpha1, alpha4, and beta2 among serous (alpha1, beta2), mucinous (alpha4), and endometrioid (alpha1) tumors. This review focuses on these and other ECM molecules in ovarian tumors.<newchar><newabs>21248285<newchar>A greater understanding of the parturition process is essential in the prevention of preterm birth, which occurs in 12.7% of infants born in the United States annually. Cervical remodeling is a critical component of this process. Beginning early in pregnancy, remodeling requires cumulative, progressive changes in the cervical extracellular matrix (ECM) that result in reorganization of collagen fibril structure with a gradual loss of tensile strength. In the current study, we undertook a detailed biochemical analysis of factors in the cervix that modulate collagen structure during early mouse pregnancy, including expression of proteins involved in processing of procollagen, assembly of collagen fibrils, cross-link formation, and deposition of collagen in the ECM. Changes in these factors correlated with changes in the types of collagen cross-links formed and packing of collagen fibrils as measured by electron microscopy. Early in pregnancy there is a decline in expression of two matricellular proteins, thrombospondin 2 and tenascin C, as well as a decline in expression of lysyl hydroxylase, which is involved in cross-link formation. These changes are accompanied by a decline in both HP and LP cross-links by gestation Days 12 and 14, respectively, as well as a progressive increase in collagen fibril diameter. In contrast, collagen abundance remains constant over the course of pregnancy. We conclude that early changes in tensile strength during cervical softening result in part from changes in the number and type of collagen cross-links and are associated with a decline in expression of two matricellular proteins thrombospondin 2 and tenascin C.<newchar><newabs>21707518<newchar>Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a cluster of at least 23 enzymes belonging to the more wide family of endopeptidases called Metzincins, whose structure is characterized by the presence of a zinc ion at the catalytic site. Although the general view of MMPs as physiologic scissors involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and tissue remodeling is still valid, additional functions have recently emerged, including the ability to cleave non ECM molecules such as growth factors, cytokines and chemokines from their membrane-anchored proforms. These functions are utilized by tumor cells and are fundamental in the determination of tumor progression and invasion. The effect of MMPs activity in cancer progression has been traditionally associated with the acquisition by tumor cells of an invasive phenotype, an indispensable requisite for the metastatic spreading of cancer cells. In addition to the traditional view, a new role for MMPs in creating a favourable microenvironment has been proposed, so that MMPs are not only involved in cell invasion, but also in signaling pathways that control cell growth, inflammation, or angiogenesis. Finally, recent evidence suggest a role of MMPs in the so called &quot;pre-metastatic niche&quot; that is the hypothesis of an early distant modification of the premetastatic site by primary cancer cells. This new hypothesis is changing our traditional view about MMPs and provides important insights into the effective time window for the therapeutic use of MMP inhibitors. In this review we provide the main available data about the ability of MMPs in creating a suitable microenvironment for tumor growth in metastatic sites and we indicate the implication of these data on the potential use of MMP inhibitors in the metastatic therapy.<newchar><newabs>19627666<newchar>Milestones in the progression to heart failure following myocardial infarction (MI) are changes in left ventricular (LV) geometry and function, termed post-MI remodeling. Critical to this adverse remodeling process are changes in the expression, synthesis, and degradation of myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The myocardial ECM is not a passive entity but a complex and dynamic microenvironment that represents an important structural and signaling system within the myocardium. In particular, basic and clinical studies have provided conclusive evidence that abnormal and persistent activation of the ECM degradation pathway, notably through the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), contribute to adverse post-MI remodeling. This review examines recent clinical studies that provide further support to the hypothesis that a specific portfolio of MMPs are diagnostic and likely contributory to LV remodeling and the progression to heart failure after MI. Future translational and clinical research focused on the molecular and cellular mechanisms regulating ECM structure and function likely will contribute to an improved understanding of post-MI LV remodeling and yield novel therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>22802911<newchar>Fibrosis is the leading cause of organ dysfunction in diseases such as systemic sclerosis, liver cirrhosis, cardiac fibrosis, progressive kidney disease, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The hallmark of fibrosis is tissue remodeling with excess deposition of extracellular matrix components, predominantly collagens. Different cell types, cytokines, growth factors, and enzymes interact in complex pathogenic networks with myofibroblasts playing a pivotal role. MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs acting as negative regulators of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. MicroRNAs have been associated with many basic cellular processes as well as with a wide spectrum of diseases, most notably cancer. This review provides a comprehensive overview of microRNAs regulating profibrotic pathways and extracellular matrix synthesis. The potential of miRNA for targeted therapeutic approaches in fibrotic disorders is also discussed.<newchar>Fibrosis<n-term>antagomirs.<n-term>connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)<n-term>epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)<n-term>extracellular matrix (ECM)<n-term>fibroblasts<n-term>microRNA (miRNA)-mediated gene regulation regulation<n-term>signaling pathways<n-term>transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β)<n-term><newabs>10515226<newchar>The ECM of astrocytic tumors promotes and modulates a variety of cell functions, such as cell attachment, migration, proliferation, survival, and signaling. Recent studies indicate that there are extensive and complex interactions among ECM molecules and that these can modify the function of the participating molecules, interactions between the proteoglycan, phosphacan, and the ECM protein, tenascin, being an example (63). In addition, on nonastrocytic cell types it has been shown that an integrin receptor and the cell surface proteoglycan CD44 recognize the same ECM ligand osteopontin, and thus modulate each others function (77, 86). Thus, interacting components in the ECM and cell surface receptors likely cooperate in regulating cell function and tumor invasion (59, 77, 80, 85-87, 95). As tumor cells are capable of remodeling their ECM through synthesis of ECM proteins and proteoglycans, as well as upregulating integrin receptors and proteoglycans on their cell surface, tumor cells are capable of controlling their own destiny. ECM molecules which are concentrated in blood vessels of malignant astrocytomas, such as tenascin-C and the 250-kDa CSPG (NG2), are potentially therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>19355972<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex of self assembled macromolecules. It is composed predominantly of collagens, non-collagenous glycoproteins, hyaluronan and proteoglycans. ECM is not only a scaffold for the cells; it serves also as a reservoir for growth factors and cytokines and modulates the cell activation status and turnover. ECM should be considered a dynamic network of molecules secreted by cells that in turn regulate cell behavior by modulating their proliferation and differentiation. The ECM provides structural strength to tissues, maintaining a complex architecture around the cells and the shape of organs. Various cell types secrete different matrix molecules and the nature and the amount of these molecules change during developmental age. Cartilage ECM is composed mainly of two components defining its mechano-physical properties: the collagenous network, responsible for the tensile strength of the cartilage matrix, and the proteoglycans (mainly aggrecan), responsible for the osmotic swelling and the elastic properties of the cartilage tissue. The conversion of cartilage into bone requires several processes that directly involve the different ECM components. Homeostasis of cartilage and bone is maintained by complex mechanisms controlling turnover and remodeling of ECM. In bone, as well as in cartilage, the ECM resident cells produce local factors, inflammatory mediators, and matrix-degrading enzymes. Turnover and degradation of normal and pathological matrices are dependent on the responses of the local cell to auto and paracrine anabolic and catabolic pathway.<newchar><newabs>22665785<newchar>We use a novel 3D inter-/intracellular force microscopy technique based on 3D traction force microscopy to measure the cell-cell junctional and intracellular tensions in subconfluent and confluent vascular endothelial cell (EC) monolayers under static and shear flow conditions. We found that z-direction cell-cell junctional tensions are higher in confluent EC monolayers than those in subconfluent ECs, which cannot be revealed in the previous 2D methods. Under static conditions, subconfluent cells are under spatially non-uniform tensions, whereas cells in confluent monolayers are under uniform tensions. The shear modulations of EC cytoskeletal remodeling, extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesions, and cell-cell junctions lead to significant changes in intracellular tensions. When a confluent monolayer is subjected to flow shear stresses with a high forward component comparable to that seen in the straight part of the arterial system, the intracellular and junction tensions preferentially increase along the flow direction over time, which may be related to the relocation of adherens junction proteins. The increases in intracellular tensions are shown to be a result of chemo-mechanical responses of the ECs under flow shear rather than a direct result of mechanical loading. In contrast, the intracellular tensions do not show a preferential orientation under oscillatory flow with a very low mean shear. These differences in the directionality and magnitude of intracellular tensions may modulate translation and transcription of ECs under different flow patterns, thus affecting their susceptibility for atherogenesis.<newchar><newabs>20006339<newchar>Interstitial flow is an important regulator of various cell behaviors both in vitro and in vivo, yet the forces that fluid flow imposes on cells embedded in a 3D extracellular matrix (ECM), and the effects of matrix architecture on those forces, are not well understood. Here, we demonstrate how fiber alignment can affect the shear and pressure forces on the cell and ECM. Using computational fluid dynamics simulations, we show that while the solutions of the Brinkman equation accurately estimate the average fluid shear stress and the drag forces on a cell within a 3D fibrous medium, the distribution of shear stress on the cellular surface as well as the peak shear stresses remain intimately related to the pericellular fiber architecture and cannot be estimated using bulk-averaged properties. We demonstrate that perpendicular fiber alignment of the ECM yields lower shear stress and pressure forces on the cells and higher stresses on the ECM, leading to decreased permeability, while parallel fiber alignment leads to higher stresses on cells and increased permeability, as compared to a cubic lattice arrangement. The Spielman-Goren permeability relationships for fibrous media agreed well with CFD simulations of flow with explicitly considered fibers. These results suggest that the experimentally observed active remodeling of ECM fibers by fibroblasts under interstitial flow to a perpendicular alignment could serve to decrease the shear and drag forces on the cell.<newchar><newabs>15963249<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes that proteolytically degrade various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Angiogenesis is the process of forming new blood vessels from existing ones and requires degradation of the vascular basement membrane and remodeling of the ECM in order to allow endothelial cells to migrate and invade into the surrounding tissue. MMPs participate in this remodeling of basement membranes and ECM. However, it has become clear that MMPs contribute more to angiogenesis than just degrading ECM components. Specific MMPs have been shown to enhance angiogenesis by helping to detach pericytes from vessels undergoing angiogenesis, by releasing ECM-bound angiogenic growth factors, by exposing cryptic proangiogenic integrin binding sites in the ECM, by generating promigratory ECM component fragments, and by cleaving endothelial cell-cell adhesions. MMPs can also contribute negatively to angiogenesis through the generation of endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors by proteolytic cleavage of certain collagen chains and plasminogen and by modulating cell receptor signaling by cleaving off their ligand-binding domains. A number of inhibitors of MMPs that show antiangiogenic activity are already in early stages of clinical trials, primarily to treat cancer and cancer-associated angiogenesis. However, because of the multiple effects of MMPs on angiogenesis, careful testing of these MMP inhibitors is necessary to show that these compounds do not actually enhance angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>18313051<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the trabecular meshwork (TM) is thought to be important in regulating intraocular pressure (IOP) in both normal and glaucomatous eyes. IOP is regulated primarily by a fluid resistance to aqueous humor outflow. However, neither the exact site nor the identity of the normal resistance to aqueous humor outflow has been established. Whether the site and nature of the increased outflow resistance, which is associated with open-angle glaucoma, is the same or different from the normal resistance is also unclear. The ECMs of the TM beams, juxtacanalicular region (JCT) and Schlemm's canal (SC) inner wall are comprised of fibrillar and non-fibrillar collagens, elastin-containing microfibrils, matricellular and structural organizing proteins, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and proteoglycans. Both basement membranes and stromal ECM are present in the TM beams and JCT region. Cell adhesion proteins, cell surface ECM receptors and associated binding proteins are also present in the beams, JCT and SC inner wall region. The outflow pathway ECM is relatively dynamic, undergoing constant turnover and remodeling. Regulated changes in enzymes responsible for ECM degradation and biosynthetic replacement are observed. IOP homeostasis, triggered by pressure changes or mechanical stretching of the TM, appears to involve ECM turnover. Several cytokines, growth factors and drugs, which affect the outflow resistance, change ECM component expression, mRNA alternative splicing, cellular cytoskeletal organization or all of these. Changes in ECM associated with open-angle glaucoma have been identified.<newchar><newabs>18445764<newchar>Hepatic fibrosis underlies most types of chronic liver diseases and is characterized by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), altered liver architecture, and impaired hepatocyte proliferation; however, the fibrotic liver can still regenerate after partial hepatectomy (PH). Therefore, the present study was aimed at addressing whether a PH-induced regeneration normalizes ECM turnover and the possible involvement of hepatic stellate cells (HSC) during resolution of a pre-established fibrosis. Male Wistar rats were rendered fibrotic by intraperitoneal administration of swine serum for 9 weeks and subjected afterwards to 70% PH or sham-operation. Histological and morphometric analyses were performed, and parameters indicative of cell proliferation, collagen synthesis and degradation, and activation of HSC were determined. Liver collagen content was reduced to 75% after PH in cirrhotic rats when compared with sham-operated cirrhotic rats. The regenerating fibrotic liver oxidized actively free proline and had diminished transcripts for alpha-1 (I) collagen mRNA, resulting in decreased collagen synthesis. PH also increased collagenase activity, accounted for by higher amounts of pro-MMP-9, MMP-2, and MMP-13, which largely coincided with a lower expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2. Therefore, an early decreased collagen synthesis, mild ECM degradation, and active liver regeneration were followed by higher collagenolysis and limited deposition of ECM, probably associated with increased mitochondrial activity. Activated HSC readily increased during liver fibrosis and remained activated after liver regeneration, even during fibrosis resolution. In conclusion, stimulation of liver regeneration through PH restores the balance in ECM synthesis/degradation, leading to ECM remodeling and to an almost complete resolution of liver fibrosis. As a response to the regenerative stimulus, activated HSC seem to play a controlling role on ECM remodeling during experimental cirrhosis in rats. Therefore, pharmacological approaches for the resolution of liver fibrosis by blocking HSC activation should also evaluate possible effects on liver cell proliferation.<newchar><newabs>22109660<newchar>Ovarian epithelial carcinomas are heterogeneous malignancies exhibiting great diversity in histological phenotypes as well as genetic and epigenetic aberrations. A general early event in tumorigenesis is regional dissemination into the peritoneal cavity. Initial spread to the peritoneum is made possible by cooperative signaling between a wide array of molecules constituting the tissue microenvironment in the coelomic epithelium. Changes in the activity of key microenvironmental components not constitutively expressed in normal tissue, including several disclosed adhesion molecules, growth factors, proteases, and G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), coordinate the transition. Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and subsequent cell surface interactions enable transformation by promoting chromosomal instability (CIN) and stimulating several common signal transduction cascades to prepare the tissue for harboring and facilitating growth, angiogenesis and metastasis of the developing tumor.<newchar><newabs>20301218<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a superfamily of Zn(2+)-dependent proteases that are capable of cleaving the proteinaceous component of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM is a critical medium for cell-cell interactions and can also directly signal cells through cell surface ECM receptors, such as integrins. In addition, many growth factors and signaling molecules are stored in the ECM. Thus, ECM remodeling and/or degradation by MMPs are expected to affect cell fate and behavior during many developmental and pathological processes. Numerous studies have shown that the expression of MMP mRNAs and proteins associates tightly with diverse developmental and pathological processes, such as tumor metastasis and mammary gland involution. In vivo evidence to support the roles of MMPs in these processes has been much harder to get. Here, we will review some of our studies on MMP11, or stromelysin-3, during the thyroid hormone-dependent amphibian metamorphosis, a process that resembles the so-called postembryonic development in mammals (from a few months before to several months after birth in humans when organ growth and maturation take place). Our investigations demonstrate that stromelysin-3 controls apoptosis in different tissues via at least two distinct mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>21742938<newchar>Most solid tumor tissues possess a significant population of macrophages, which are known to be closely linked with tumor progression and metastasis. Clusterin has been reported to be overexpressed in various tumors and to have a tumor-promoting role. As clusterin induction and macrophage infiltration occur concurrently at the tumor site, it raises a possibility that clusterin may regulate the function of macrophages via facilitating ECM remodeling. Here, we demonstrate for the first time the expression of MMP-9 by clusterin in human primary monocytes as well as human and murine macrophage cell lines, THP-1, and Raw264.7. MMP-9 expression was accompanied by increased enzymatic activity, as revealed by gelatin zymography. The MMP-9 activity promoted by clusterin was found to be dependent on the activation of ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt but not p38 or JNK pathways. Inhibition of PI3K activity did not affect the activation of ERK1/2 and vice versa, indicating that the two pathways were independently operated to stimulate MMP-9 activity. Moreover, clusterin facilitated nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 along with IκB-α degradation and phosphorylation, which was critical for MMP-9 expression. As NF-κB is a central regulator of inflammation, clusterin may provide a molecular link between inflammation and cancer via up-regulating NF-κB and MMP-9. Collectively, these data highlight a novel role of clusterin as a stimulator for MMP-9 expression in macrophages, which may contribute to the tissue reorganization by serving as a modulator for ECM degradation.<newchar><newabs>16488477<newchar>Blood vessels are dynamic structures composed of cells and extracellular matrix (ECM), which are in continuous cross-talk with each other. Thus, cellular changes in phenotype or in proliferation/death rate affect ECM synthesis. In turn, ECM elements not only provide the structural framework for vascular cells, but they also modulate cellular function through specific receptors. These ECM-cell interactions, together with neurotransmitters, hormones and the mechanical forces imposed by the heart, modulate the structural organization of the vascular wall. It is not surprising that pathological states related to alterations in the nervous, humoral or haemodynamic environment-such as hypertension-are associated with vascular wall remodeling, which, in the end, is deleterious for cardiovascular function. However, the question remains whether these structural alterations are simply a consequence of the disease or if there are early cellular or ECM alterations-determined either genetically or by environmental factors-that can predispose to vascular remodeling independent of hypertension. Elastic fibres might be key elements in the pathophysiology of hypertensive vascular remodeling. In addition to the well known effects of hypertension on elastic fibre fatigue and accelerated degradation, leading to loss of arterial wall resilience, recent investigations have highlighted new roles for individual components of elastic fibres and their degradation products. These elements can act as signal transducers and regulate cellular proliferation, migration, phenotype, and ECM degradation. In this paper, we review current knowledge regarding components of elastic fibres and discuss their possible pathomechanistic associations with vascular structural abnormalities and with hypertension development or progression.<newchar><newabs>21247159<newchar>Although mechanical stress is known to profoundly influence the composition and structure of the extracellular matrix (ECM), the mechanisms by which this regulation occurs remain poorly understood. We used a single-molecule magnetic tweezers assay to study the effect of force on collagen proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1). Here we show that the application of ∼10 pN in extensional force causes an ∼100-fold increase in proteolysis rates. Our results support a mechanistic model in which the collagen triple helix unwinds prior to proteolysis. The data and resulting model predict that biologically relevant forces may increase localized ECM proteolysis, suggesting a possible role for mechanical force in the regulation of ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>11414785<newchar>Scar formation following adult spinal cord (SC) hemisection is accompanied by important remodeling of the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Since ECM molecules provide the substrate for axon growth, these changes in ECM composition are likely to influence the process of axonal regeneration. Here we investigated whether scar formation could be associated with the activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a class of proteins implicated in ECM remodeling thought to favor axonal regeneration in the peripheral nervous system. Two members of the MMP family, MMP-2 and MMP-9, were found to be transiently upregulated in the SC wound. In situ fluorescent zymography revealed a MMP-related gelatinase activity (GA) in the wound, which was spatially and temporally correlated with scar formation. The GA formed a striking pattern of interwoven pathways along which neurites were seen to grow. These pathways corresponded to the distribution of other ECM molecules, which are known to have antagonistic effects on axonal regrowth. Our results suggest that neurite ingrowth into the wound may transiently benefit from this ECM remodeling and, in particular, from the upregulation of MMPs.<newchar><newabs>22525039<newchar>A systems understanding of mechanical regulation is critical for determining how cells proliferate and differentiate. To better understand the biological process in which mechanical signals regulate cells, we globally investigated the gene expression profiling via long serial analysis of gene expression (Long SAGE) in osteoblasts after exposure to mechanical stretching. The analysis showed that the differentially expressed genes were related with many physiological processes, including signal transduction, cell proliferation and apoptosis. Several genes that were seldom or never studied in osteoblasts have been found in this study. We further analyzed the signal pathways and provided gene regulatory networks activated by mechanical signals. Many changed genes in our data were contributed to ECM-integrin-FAK mediated pathway and mainly influenced actin-cytoskeleton dynamic remodeling, cell proliferation and differentiation. We also provided evidence supporting the hypothesis that endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrion were combined to dedicate to calcium regulation. Taken together, our experiments provided a systemic view on biological processes and mechanotransduction network in osteoblasts, suggesting that mechanical signals regulate osteoblast through a greater diversity of interactions and pathways than previously appreciated.<newchar><newabs>22245418<newchar>The purpose of this study was to identify those proteins relatively more abundant in the synovial fluid (SF) of patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA) using high performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. 20 individual SF samples from each disease were pooled into two groups (RA and OA) to reduce the contribution of extreme individual values. Prior to the proteomic analysis, samples were immunodepleted from the top 20 most abundant plasma proteins, to enrich the lower-abundance protein fractions. Then, they were subjected to protein size fractioning and in-gel digestion, followed by reversed-phase peptide separation in a nano-LC system and subsequent peptide identification by MALDI-TOF/TOF. This strategy led to the identification of 136 different proteins in SF, which is the largest number of SF proteins described up to date by proteomics. A relative quantification of the proteins between RA and OA was carried out by spectral counting analysis. In RA, our results show a greater relative abundance of proteins related to complement activation, inflammation and the immune response, such as the major matrix metalloproteinases and several neutrophil-related proteins. In OA, we detected an increase in proteins involved in the formation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), such as fibronectin, kininogen-1, cartilage acidic protein 1 and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein. The results obtained for MMP-1, BGH3, fibronectin and gelsolin were verified by immunoblotting analyses. Some of the novel proteins identified in this work might be relevant not only for increasing knowledge on the etiopathogenesis of RA and OA processes, but also as putative disease biomarkers, as their presence in SF is a prior step to their dilution in serum. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Proteomics: The clinical link.<newchar><newabs>21822103<newchar>The role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPS) in the pathophysiology of rotator cuff tears has not been established yet. Recent advances empathize about the role of MMPs and TIMPS in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and degradation in rotator cuff tears pathogenesis and healing after surgical repair. An increase in MMPs synthesis and the resulting MMPs mediated alterations in the ECM of tendons have been implicated in the etiopathogenesis of tendinopathy, and there is an increase in the expression of MMPs and a decrease in TIMP messenger ribonucleic acid expression in tenocytes from degenerative or ruptured tendons. Importantly, MMPs are amenable to inhibition by cheap, safe, and widely available drugs such as the tetracycline antibiotics and bisphosphonates. A better understanding of relationship and activity of these molecules could provide better strategies to optimize outcomes of rotator cuff therapy.<newchar><newabs>20195533<newchar>Glaucoma is a disease frequently associated with elevated intraocular pressure that can be alleviated by filtration surgery. However, the post-operative subconjunctival scarring response which blocks filtration efficiency is a major hurdle to the achievement of long-term surgical success. Current application of anti-proliferatives to modulate the scarring response is not ideal as these often give rise to sight-threatening complications. SPARC (secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine) is a matricellular protein involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) production and organization. In this study, we investigated post-operative surgical wound survival in an experimental glaucoma filtration model in SPARC-null mice. Loss of SPARC resulted in a marked (87.5%) surgical wound survival rate compared to 0% in wild-type (WT) counterparts. The larger SPARC-null wounds implied that aqueous filtration through the subconjunctival space was more efficient in comparison to WT wounds. The pronounced increase in both surgical survival and filtration efficiency was associated with a less collagenous ECM, smaller collagen fibril diameter, and a loosely-organized subconjunctival matrix in the SPARC-null wounds. In contrast, WT wounds exhibited a densely packed collagenous ECM with no evidence of filtration capacity. Immunolocalization assays confirmed the accumulation of ECM proteins in the WT but not in the SPARC-null wounds. The observations in vivo were corroborated by complementary data performed on WT and SPARC-null conjunctival fibroblasts in vitro. These findings indicate that depletion of SPARC bestows an inherent change in post-operative ECM remodeling to favor wound maintenance. The evidence presented in this report is strongly supportive for the targeting of SPARC to increase the success of glaucoma filtration surgery.<newchar><newabs>21956842<newchar>Chondrocytes interact with their neighbours through their cartilaginous extracellular matrix (ECM). Chondrocyte-matrix interactions compensate the lack of cell-cell contact and are modulated by proteoglycans and other molecules. The epiphyseal growth plate is a highly organized tissue responsible for long bone elongation. The growth plate is regulated by gradients of morphogens that are established by proteoglycans. Morphogens diffuse across the ECM, creating short- and long-range signalling that lead to the formation of a polarized tissue. Mutations affecting genes that modulate cell-matrix interactions are linked to several human disorders. Homozygous mutations of EXT1/EXT2 result in reduced synthesis and shortened heparan sulphate chains on both cell surface and matrix proteoglycans. This disrupts the diffusion gradients of morphogens and signal transduction in the epiphyseal growth plate, contributing to loss of cell polarity and osteochondroma formation. Osteochondromas are cartilage-capped bony projections arising from the metaphyses of endochondral bones adjacent to the growth plate. The osteochondroma cap is formed by cells with homozygous mutation of EXT1/EXT2 and committed stem cells/wild-type chondrocytes. Osteochondroma serves as a niche (a permissive environment), which facilitates the committed stem cells/wild-type chondrocytes to acquire secondary genetic changes to form a secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma. In such a scenario, the micro-environment is the site of the initiating processes that ultimately lead to cancer.<newchar><newabs>21959416<newchar>The aim of this study was to analyze histologic and immunohistochemical modifications taking place in maxillary sites reconstructed by iliac crest bone grafts, 4 months (T1) and 10 years (T2) after grafting, in comparison to native iliac crest bone (T0).By light microscopy, T1 samples showed well-organized osteoblasts and extracellular matrix (ECM), and surrounding areas of connective tissue where a discrete number of blood vessels can be distinguished. Samples obtained from reconstructed areas after a long period of follow-up (T2) were characterized by uniform mineralized ECM with cavities containing osteocytes, whereas T0 samples disclosed both mineralized matrix and bone marrow. Matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and bone sialoprotein (BSP) expressions were investigated by immunohistochemical analysis. Both MMP-2 and VEGF showed significantly increased expression in T1, with respect to T0, and lowered in T2. Otherwise, BSP expression, which was elevated in native iliac crest bone (T0), was deeply decreased in T1 and T2 samples. Moreover, changes in iNOS expression and in apoptotic cell nuclei percentages (TUNEL analysis) seemed to have a similar trend, increasing in T1 and lowering in T2.After a period of 4 months, iliac crest bone graft-reconstructed sites show mineralizing nuclei not strongly represented, as suggested by BSP lower expression, whereas new blood vessel proliferation and active remodeling phenomena are developing. After a long period from the grafting (T2), BSP expression decreases along with MMP-2, VEGF, and iNOS, suggesting the presence of only weak arrangement phenomena of the graft.<newchar><newabs>22143909<newchar>Over the past decade, a large number of strategies and technologies have been developed to reduce heart failure progression. Among these, cardiac tissue engineering is one of the most promising. Aim of this study is to develop a 3D scaffold to treat cardiac failure. A new three-block copolymer, obtained from δ-valerolactone and polyoxyethylene, was synthesised under high vacuum without catalyst. Copolymer/gelatine blends were microfabricated to obtain a ECM-like geometry. Structures were studied under morphological, mechanical, degradation and biological aspects. To prevent left ventricular remodelling, constructs were biofunctionalises with molecularly imprinted nanoparticles towards the matrix metalloproteinase MMP-9. Results showed that materials are able to reproduce the ECM structure with high resolution, mechanical properties were in the order of MPa similar to those of the native myocardium and cell viability was verified. Nanoparticles showed the capability to rebind MMP-9 (specific rebinding 18.67) and to be permanently immobilised on the scaffold surface.<newchar><newabs>11241662<newchar>Appropriate matrix formation, turnover and remodeling in tissue-engineered small diameter vascular conduits are crucial requirements for their long-term patency and function. This complex process requires the deposition and accumulation of extracellular matrix molecules as well as the remodeling of this extracellular matrix (ECM) by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs). In this study, we have investigated the dynamics of ECM production and the activity of MMPs and TIMPs in long-term tissue-engineered vascular conduits using quantitative ECM analysis, substrate gel electrophoresis, radiometric enzyme assays and Western blot analyses. Over a time period of 169 days in vivo, levels of elastin and proteoglycans/glycosaminoglycans in tissue-engineered constructs came to approximate those of their native tissue counter parts. The kinetics of collagen deposition and remodeling, however, apparently require a much longer time period. Through the use of substrate gel electrophoresis, proteolytic bands whose molecular weight was consistent with their identification as the active form of MMP-2 (approximately 64--66 kDa) were detected in all native and tissue-engineered samples. Additional proteolytic bands migrating at approximately 72 kDa representing the latent form of MMP-2 were detected in tissue-engineered samples at time points from 5 throughout 55 days. Radiometric assays of MMP-1 activity demonstrated no significant differences between the native and tissue-engineered samples. This study determines the dynamics of ECM production and turnover in a long-term tissue-engineered vascular tissue and highlights the importance of ECM remodeling in the development of successful tissue-engineered vascular structures.<newchar><newabs>21087457<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) consist of a multigene family of zinc-dependent extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling endopeptidases implicated in pathological processes, such as carcinogenesis. In this regard, their activity plays a pivotal role in tumor growth and the multistep processes of invasion and metastasis, including proteolytic degradation of ECM, alteration of the cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions, migration and angiogenesis. The underlying premise of the current minireview is that MMPs are able to proteolytically process substrates in the extracellular milieu and, in so doing, promote tumor progression. However, certain members of the MMP family exert contradicting roles at different stages during cancer progression, depending among other factors on the tumor stage, tumor site, enzyme localization and substrate profile. MMPs are therefore amenable to therapeutic intervention by synthetic and natural inhibitors, providing perspectives for future studies. Multiple therapeutic agents, called matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors (MMPIs) have been developed to target MMPs, attempting to control their enzymatic activity. Even though clinical trials with these compounds do not show the expected results in most cases, the field of MMPIs is ongoing. This minireview critically evaluates the role of MMPs in relation to cancer progression, and highlights the challenges, as well as future prospects, for the design, development and efficacy of MMPIs.<newchar><newabs>22100390<newchar>MMPs are generally considered to regulate degradation and remodeling of the ECM. Convincing data also implicate a role for MMPs in inflammatory conditions, such as AP, although the mechanisms are not known. The aim of this study was to define the role of MMPs in regulating activation of trypsinogen and tissue damage in AP, which was induced by infusion of taurocholate into the pancreatic duct in mice. A broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor (BB-94) and MMP-9 gene-deficient mice were used. Neutrophil secretions and rMMP-9 were used to stimulate trypsinogen activation in isolated acinar cells. Taurocholate challenge increased serum amylase, neutrophil infiltration, MIP-2 (CXCL2) formation, trypsinogen activation, and tissue damage in the pancreas. Treatment with the broad-spectrum inhibitor of MMPs, BB-94, markedly reduced activation of trypsinogen, levels of CXCL2, infiltration of neutrophils, and tissue damage in AP. Taurocholate challenge increased serum levels of MMP-9 but not MMP-2. Taurocholate-induced amylase levels, neutrophil accumulation, production of CXCL2, trypsinogen activation, and tissue damage in the pancreas were abolished in MMP-9-deficient mice. Moreover, secretions from activated neutrophils isolated from WT but not from MMP-9-deficient animals stimulated trypsinogen activation in acinar cells. Notably, rMMP-9 greatly enhanced activation of trypsinogen in acinar cells. These findings demonstrate that neutrophil-derived MMP-9 is a potent activator of trypsinogen in acinar cells and regulates pathological inflammation and tissue damage in AP.<newchar><newabs>21087456<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a group of structurally related proteolytic enzymes containing a zinc ion in the active site. They are secreted from cells or bound to the plasma membrane and hydrolyze extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell surface-bound molecules. They therefore play key roles in morphogenesis, wound healing, tissue repair and remodeling in diseases such as cancer and arthritis. Although the cell anchored membrane-type MMPs (MT-MMPs) function pericellularly, the secreted MMPs have been considered to act within the ECM, away from the cells from which they are synthesized. However, recent studies have shown that secreted MMPs bind to specific cell surface receptors, membrane-anchored proteins or cell-associated ECM molecules and function pericellularly at focussed locations. This minireview describes examples of cell surface and pericellular partners of MMPs, as well as how they alter enzyme function and cellular behaviour.<newchar><newabs>17136480<newchar>A matricellular protein, osteopontin (OPN), is expressed in response to mechanical stress and similar stimuli in the heart, integrates the inter-ECM signal transduction network of component cells, and maintains efficient contractility through quantitative and qualitative control of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. In particular, OPN is re-expressed in the process of tissue damage; combines with other cell growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and proteases as a cytokine itself or as an adhesion molecule; and controls the differentiation and growth of cells involved in restoration of tissues by controlling inter-cellular signal transduction and production of ECM proteins through regulation of expression levels and activity. A study using mice lacking a functional OPN gene indicated that tissue restoration fails and collagen deposition is inhibited through matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in mice lacking OPN. Thus, while OPN accelerates the cardiovascular remodeling process, it also regulates the balance of various inter-cellular activities. In addition, OPN not only promotes arteriosclerosis but is also closely associated with angiogenesis. With the roles of OPN expected to be clinically elucidated, the clinical use of OPN for control of cardiovascular remodeling may be feasible. Points (1) Osteopontin (OPN) efficiently propagates contraction in the heart as a matricellular protein and thereby controls ECM proteins both quantitatively and qualitatively. (2) The quantitative and qualitative control of ECM proteins is involved in interaction with OPN receptors including those of the integrin family, CD44, and others. (3) OPN promotes myocardial remodeling through TGFbeta and MMPs. (4) OPN not only promotes arteriosclerosis but is also closely associated with arteriosteogenesis. (5) In animals lacking OPN, tissue remodeling process is inhibited, especially in terms of fibrosis after myocardial infarction. (6) While the significance of OPN as an immune system molecule is still unclear in detail, the significance of OPN in the regenerative immune system has begun to be determined.<newchar><newabs>10773229<newchar>The cardiac fibroblast is the most abundant cell type present in the myocardium and is mainly responsible for the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM). Important components of cardiac ECM include structural and adhesive proteins such as collagen and fibronectin. Excess deposition of cardiac ECM (fibrosis) has been associated with the pathophysiological mechanical overload of the heart. Therefore, the role of cardiac fibroblasts in &quot;sensing&quot;, &quot;integrating&quot; and &quot;responding&quot; to mechanical stimuli is of great interest. The development of in vitro strain apparatuses has allowed scientists to investigate the effects of mechanical stimuli on cardiac fibroblast function. Cardiac fibroblasts express ECM receptors (integrins) which couple mechanical stimuli to functional responses. Mechanical stimulation of cardiac fibroblasts has been shown to result in activation of various signal transduction pathways. The application of defined mechanical stimuli to cultured cardiac fibroblasts has been associated with ECM gene expression, growth factor production, release and/or bioactivity as well as collagenase activity. Ultimately, for fibrosis to develop the overproduction of ECM must overcome any associated increases in collagenase activity. Mechanically induced upregulation of ECM production may follow direct or indirect pathways through the autocrine or paracrine action of growth factors. Given the complex nature of the interstitial milieu of the working heart, additional research is needed to further our understanding of the roles that mechanical stimuli play in excess deposition of myocardial ECM.<newchar><newabs>16979182<newchar>Angiotensin II (Ang-II) plays pivotal roles in the progression of left ventricular (LV) remodeling in diseased hearts; it remains to be elucidated how Ang-II links to degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Using hypertensive Dahl salt-sensitive rats that show the distinctive transition from concentric LV hypertrophy to LV remodeling, we chronically treated them with an angiotensin type-1 receptor blocker (telmisartan 5 mg/kg/day, ARB group) or vehicle (0.5% CMC, CHF group). During the process of LV remodeling, we assessed, (1) in-vivo LV shape and function; (2) animal survival; (3) amounts of ECM in LV using a scanning electron microscope (SEM); (4) mRNA (by real time RT-PCR) and protein (by immunoblotting) levels in LV of NADPH oxidase, glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPX-1), and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, -9, and -13; (5) immunohistochemical staining of myocardial 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal and 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine; (6) nuclear factor kappa-B (NFkappaB) protein levels in the nuclear extract; and (7) endogenous activities of MMP-2 and -9 by an antibody capture method. Compared with CHF, ARB group showed an improvement of survival and preserved LV shape and function, and ECM density in SEM that was accompanied by decreases in oxidative stress-mediated protein degenerations, activities of GPX-1, NADPH oxidase, NFkappaB, and MMP-2, -9, and -13. Local activation of Ang-II in hypertrophic LV triggers MMP-mediated ECM degradation, namely LV remodeling, at least in part, through NADPH oxidase-induced oxidative stress and the subsequent NFkappaB activation.<newchar><newabs>21640103<newchar>Angiogenesis is regulated by both soluble growth factors and cellular interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM). While cell adhesion via integrins has been shown to be required for angiogenesis, the effects of quantitative changes in cell adhesion and spreading against the ECM remain less clear. Here, we show that angiogenic sprouting in natural and engineered three-dimensional matrices exhibited a biphasic response, with peak sprouting when adhesion to the matrix was limited to intermediate levels. Examining changes in global gene expression to determine a genetic basis for this response, we demonstrate a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced upregulation of genes associated with vascular invasion and remodeling when cell adhesion was limited, whereas cells on highly adhesive surfaces upregulated genes associated with proliferation. To explore a mechanistic basis for this effect, we turned to focal adhesion kinase (FAK), a central player in adhesion signaling previously implicated in angiogenesis, and its homologue, proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2). While FAK signaling had some impact, our results suggested that Pyk2 can regulate both gene expression and endothelial sprouting through its enhanced activation by VEGF in limited adhesion contexts. We also demonstrate decreased sprouting of tissue explants from Pyk2-null mice as compared to wild type mice as further confirmation of the role of Pyk2 in angiogenic sprouting. These results suggest a surprising finding that limited cell adhesion can enhance endothelial responsiveness to VEGF and demonstrate a novel role for Pyk2 in the adhesive regulation of angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>14739768<newchar>Regulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important therapeutic target that can potentially attenuate the adverse ventricular remodeling seen in the progression of heart failure. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) degrade numerous ECM proteins. Importantly, the activation of MMPs and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs) are associated with ventricular remodeling. Bioactive-molecules (vasoactive peptides) become activated in proportion to the magnitude of heart failure and have been demonstrated to affect directly collagen degradation as well as collagen synthesis in the myocardium. Pro-fibrotic factors such as norepinephrine, angiotensin II, and endothelin-1 stimulate fibrosis by modulating collagen synthesis and MMP/TIMP activity. Antagonism of these bioactive-molecules has produced improved hemodynamic performance concomitant with modulation of MMP/TIMP activity and in association with reverse remodeling. The natriuretic peptides and nitric oxide, both of which function via the second messenger cGMP, demonstrate anti-fibrotic actions by inhibiting collagen synthesis and by stimulating MMP activity. Furthermore, bioactive-molecules along with certain cytokines are reported to amplify MMP activity, suggesting that different signaling systems work together to modulate ECM turnover. Taken together, the evidence supports an important functional role for bioactive-molecules in the regulation of ECM turnover and suggests that pharmacological intervention at the level of such bioactive molecules may provide potential therapeutic strategies for attenuation of the adverse ventricular remodeling associated with the progression of heart failure.<newchar><newabs>22227273<newchar>The disease of reproductive women, endometriosis represents implantation of functional endometrial glands outside uterine cavity. This invasive disorder is associated with dysregulation of matrix metalloproteases (MMP)s and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In this study, we investigated the role of MMP-3 on apoptosis during endometriosis. We also checked whether curcumin has potency to regress endometriosis by modulating MMP-3 and apoptotic pathway. Mouse model of endometriosis was designed by intraperitoneal inoculation of endometrial tissues to syngeneic female BALB/c. At 15th day, stable endometriotic developments were observed with increased MMP-3 expression. TUNEL positive cells were also found with endometriotic progression, which might resulted from destruction of local immune cells. We speculate that increased MMP-3 activity might be involved in the Fas mediated apoptosis. Curcumin treatment regressed endometriosis by inhibiting NFκB translocation and MMP-3 expression. It also accelerated apoptosis in endometriomas predominantly via cytochrome-c mediated mitochondrial pathway. Involvement of mitochondria in apoptosis was further confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). These results were also supported by our therapeutic study, where curcumin induced apoptosis both by p53 dependent and independent manner, while celecoxib followed only p53 independent pathway. Altogether, our study establishes the novel role of curcumin as a potent anti-endometriotic compound.<newchar><newabs>21425431<newchar>Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and its recurrence after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) are associated with the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) components [particularly collagen (Col)], which leads to fibrosis. Our aim was to determine whether the development of antibodies (Abs) to self-antigen Col in HCV-infected patients correlates with the fibrosis stage and the peripheral cytokine response. Patients with chronic HCV infection, patients with HCV recurrence after OLT who had undergone a biopsy procedure, and healthy control subjects were enrolled. The HCV subjects (n = 70) were stratified as follows: (1) a non-OLT group without fibrosis (Scheuer stages 0-2), (2) a non-OLT group with fibrosis (Scheuer stages 3-4), (3) a post-OLT group without fibrosis (Scheuer stages 0-2), and (4) a post-OLT group with fibrosis (Scheuer stages 3-4). Serum samples were analyzed for Abs against Col1, Col2, Col4, Col5, and vimentin with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Serum levels of cytokines were measured with multiplex bead immunoassays. The levels of Abs to Col1 were higher in the fibrosis groups versus the no-fibrosis groups and the controls for both non-OLT patients (P &lt; 0.001) and post-OLT patients (P = 0.01). There were increased levels of Abs to Col2, Col4, Col5, and vimentin in the non-OLT fibrosis group (Col2, P = 0.0001; Col4, P = 0.122; Col5, P &lt; 0.0001; vimentin, P = 0.36) and in the post-OLT fibrosis group (Col2, P = 0.006; Col4, P = 0.19; Col5, P &lt; 0.0001; vimentin, P = 0.24) in comparison with the no-fibrosis groups. The non-OLT and post-OLT fibrosis groups demonstrated significantly higher T helper 2 (T(h) 2) and T helper 17 (T(h) 17) cytokine levels and lower T helper 1 cytokine levels in comparison with the no-fibrosis groups. Our results demonstrate that in HCV-infected patients, the levels of Abs to ECM Col1, Col2, and Col5 positively correlate with liver fibrosis, which is associated with a predominantly T(h) 2 and T(h) 17 cytokine profile.<newchar><newabs>21454251<newchar>Microvascular rarefaction following an episode of acute kidney injury (AKI) is associated with renal hypoxia and progression toward chronic kidney disease. The mechanisms contributing to microvascular rarefaction are not well-understood, although disruption in local angioregulatory substances is thought to contribute. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 is an endopeptidase important in modifying the extracellular matrix (ECM) and remodeling the vasculature. We examined the role of MMP-9 gene deletion on microvascular rarefaction in a rodent model of ischemic AKI. MMP-9-null mice and background control (FVB/NJ) mice were subjected to bilateral renal artery clamping for 20 min followed by reperfusion for 14, 28, or 56 days. Serum creatinine level in MMP-9-null mice 24 h after injury [1.4 (SD 0.8) mg/dl] was not significantly different from FVB/NJ mice [1.5 (SD 0.6) mg/dl]. Four weeks after ischemic injury, FVB/NJ mice demonstrated a 30-40% loss of microvascular density compared with sham-operated (SO) mice. In contrast, microvascular density was not significantly different in the MMP-9-null mice at this time following injury compared with SO mice. FVB/NJ mice had a 50% decrease in tissue vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 2 wk after ischemic insult compared with SO mice. A significant difference in VEGF was not observed in MMP-9-null mice compared with SO mice. There was no significant difference in the liberation of angioinhibitory fragments from the ECM between MMP-9-null mice and FVB/NJ mice following ischemic injury. In conclusion, MMP-9 deletion stabilizes microvascular density following ischemic AKI in part by preserving tissue VEGF levels.<newchar><newabs>19931152<newchar>Tumors are characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and stiffening. The importance of ECM remodeling to cancer is appreciated; the relevance of stiffening is less clear. We found that breast tumorigenesis is accompanied by collagen crosslinking, ECM stiffening, and increased focal adhesions. Induction of collagen crosslinking stiffened the ECM, promoted focal adhesions, enhanced PI3 kinase (PI3K) activity, and induced the invasion of an oncogene-initiated epithelium. Inhibition of integrin signaling repressed the invasion of a premalignant epithelium into a stiffened, crosslinked ECM and forced integrin clustering promoted focal adhesions, enhanced PI3K signaling, and induced the invasion of a premalignant epithelium. Consistently, reduction of lysyl oxidase-mediated collagen crosslinking prevented MMTV-Neu-induced fibrosis, decreased focal adhesions and PI3K activity, impeded malignancy, and lowered tumor incidence. These data show how collagen crosslinking can modulate tissue fibrosis and stiffness to force focal adhesions, growth factor signaling and breast malignancy.<newchar><newabs>20864640<newchar>Lpar3 is upregulated in the preimplantation uterus, and deletion of Lpar3 leads to delayed uterine receptivity in mice. Microarray analysis revealed that there was higher expression of Col3a1 and Col6a3 in the Preimplantation Day 3.5 Lpar3(-/-) uterus compared to Day 3.5 wild-type (WT) uterus. Since extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is indispensable during embryo implantation, and dynamic spatiotemporal alteration of specific collagen types is part of this process, this study aimed to characterize the expression of four main uterine collagen types: fibril-forming collagen (COL) I and COL III, basement membrane COL IV, and microfibrillar COL VI in the peri-implantation WT and Lpar3(-/-) uterus. An observed delay of COL III and COL VI clearance in the Lpar3(-/-) uterus may be associated with higher preimplantation expression of Col3a1 and Col6a3. There was also delayed clearance of COL I and delayed deposition of COL IV in the decidual zone in the Lpar3(-/-) uterus. These changes were different from the effects of 17beta-estradiol and progesterone on uterine collagen expression in ovariectomized WT uterus, indicating that the altered collagen expression in Lpar3(-/-) uterus is unlikely to be a result of alterations in ovarian hormones. Decreased expression of several genes encoding matrix-degrading metallo- and serine proteinases was observed in the Lpar3(-/-) uterus. These results demonstrate that pathways downstream of LPA3 are involved in the dynamic remodeling of ECM in the peri-implantation uterus.<newchar><newabs>17690929<newchar>We previously reported that when the stress relaxation response of urinary bladder wall (UBW) tissue was analyzed using a single continuous reduced relaxation function (RRF), we observed non-uniformly distributed, time-dependent residuals (Ann Biomed Eng 32(10):1409-1419, 2004). We concluded that the single relaxation spectrum was inadequate and that a new viscoelastic model for bladder wall was necessary. In the present study, we report a new approach composed of independent RRFs for smooth muscle and the extracellular matrix components (ECM), connected through a stress-dependent recruitment function. In order to determine the RRF for the ECM component, biaxial stress relaxation experiments were first performed on decellularized extracellular matrix network of the bladder obtained from normal and spinal cord injured rats. While it was assumed that smooth muscle followed a single spectrum RRF, modeling the UBW ECM required a dual-Gaussian spectrum. Experimental results revealed that the ECM stress relaxation response was insensitive to the initial stress level. Thus, the average ECM RRF parameters were determined by fitting the average stress relaxation data. The resulting stress relaxation behavior of whole bladder tissue was modeled by combining the ECM RRF with the RRF for the smooth muscle component using an exponential recruitment function representing the recruitment of collagen fibers at higher stress levels. In summary, the present study demonstrated, for the first time, that stress relaxation response of bladder tissue can be better modeled when divided into the contributions of the extracellular matrix and smooth muscle components. This modeling approach is suitable for prediction of mechanical behaviors of the urinary bladder and other organs that exhibit rapid tissue remodeling (i.e., smooth muscle hypertrophy and altered ECM synthesis) under various pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>21126338<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in tissue formation, homeostasis and repair, mutations in ECM components have catastrophic consequences for organ function and therefore, for the fitness and survival of the organism. Collagen, fibrillin and elastin polymers represent the architectural scaffolds that impart specific mechanic properties to tissues and organs. Fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils) have the additional function of distributing, concentrating and modulating local transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signals that regulate a plethora of cellular activities, including ECM formation and remodeling. Fibrillins also contain binding sites for integrin receptors, which induce adaptive responses to changes in the extracellular microenvironment by reorganizing the cytoskeleton, controlling gene expression, and releasing and activating matrix-bound latent TGF-β complexes. Genetic evidence has indicated that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 contribute differently to the organization and structural properties of non-collagenous architectural scaffolds, which in turn translate into discrete regulatory outcomes of locally released TGF-β and BMP signals. Additionally, the study of congenital dysfunctions of fibrillin-1 has yielded insights into the pathogenesis of acquired connective tissue disorders of the connective tissue, such as scleroderma. On the one hand, mutations that affect the structure or expression of fibrillin-1 perturb microfibril biogenesis, stimulate improper latent TGF-β activation, and give rise to the pleiotropic manifestations in Marfan syndrome (MFS). On the other hand, mutations located around the integrin-binding site of fibrillin-1 perturb cell matrix interactions, architectural matrix assembly and extracellular distribution of latent TGF-β complexes, and lead to the highly restricted fibrotic phenotype of Stiff Skin syndrome. Understanding the molecular similarities and differences between congenital and acquired forms of skin fibrosis may therefore provide new therapeutic tools to mitigate or even prevent disease progression in scleroderma and perhaps other fibrotic conditions.<newchar><newabs>20528669<newchar>The prevailing dogma in tissue engineering is cell-centric. One shortcoming of this approach is the failure to provide the implanted cells with a suitable in vivo microenvironment that promotes tissue reconstruction. Extracellular matrix (ECM)-based scaffolds provide a three-dimensional microenvironment that can promote constructive and functional tissue remodeling rather than inflammation and scarring even in the absence of any implanted cells. The objective of this study was to determine the ability of an ECM-based scaffold to facilitate functional restoration of the distal gastrocnemius musculotendinous junction in a canine model after complete resection of the tissue. Within 6 months, vascularized, innervated skeletal muscle that was similar to normal muscle tissue had formed at the ECM-scaffold implantation site. This neo-tissue generated 48% of the contractile force of contralateral musculotendinous junction and represents the first report of de novo formation of contractile, vascularized, and innervated skeletal muscle in situ after significant tissue loss.<newchar><newabs>10525476<newchar>Extracellular influences known to affect the regulation of chondrocyte biosynthetic and catabolic activity have been shown to include soluble factors, extracellular matrix and mechanical stress. A balance of these numerous extracellular influences is required for normal function of articular cartilage. It is likely that OA is the result of an imbalance of regulatory influences, ultimately resulting in deleterious changes in gene expression, altered extracellular matrix (ECM) and tissue degeneration. Molecular signaling via soluble mediators has been shown to be crucial to cartilage homeostasis. A number of vitamins, hormones, growth/differentiation factors and cytokines have been implicated in chondrocyte differentiation and cartilage metabolism. During normal maintenance, as well as in aging and pathology, these soluble factors can significantly influence the physical properties and the function of cartilage. Chondrocytes, like cells in other tissues, exist within an information-rich extracellular environment consisting of ECM molecules, a milieu which interacts with and modulates the activity of growth factors, hormones and ECM remodeling enzymes. Cell surface matrix receptors, including a family of proteins known as integrins, connect structural information in the ECM to a complex cellular response mechanism in the cell's interior. Integrins on cell surfaces detect and transduce signals in a cooperative manner with other adhesion receptor classes and/or growth factor receptors. The effects of mechanical stress upon a number of chondrocyte biological parameters has been examined in several laboratories. Other investigations have addressed the mechanism by which mechanical force affects biochemical and biosynthetic processes in chondrocytes, in particular synthesis of aggrecan, a major component of the cartilage ECM. Each of these extracellular influences upon chondrocyte metabolism may affect regulation of chondrocyte ECM biosynthesis at many levels, including mRNA transcription, RNA splicing, nuclear transport, protein translation, post-translational modification, intracellular vesicular transport, and protein secretion. Transcriptional regulation of some of the major protein and proteoglycan components of the cartilage ECM has been examined in a number of species, and promoters have been characterized for aggrecan, link protein and collagen type II genes. There is evidence that gene expression may be altered in OA cartilage, providing clues as to which subsets of genes expressed in chondrocytes may be considered relevant to OA pathophysiology.<newchar><newabs>14741600<newchar>Xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) can be harvested and configured to function as a bioscaffold for tissue and organ reconstruction. The mechanical properties of the ECM vary depending upon the tissue from which it is harvested. Likewise, the manufacturing steps required to develop ECMs into medical grade devices will affect the surface morphology and the mechanical properties of the bioscaffold; important properties for constructive tissue remodeling. The present study compared the ball-burst strength of five different ECM scaffolds before and after treatment with peracetic acid (PAA): porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS), porcine urinary bladder submucosa (UBS), porcine urinary bladder matrix (UBM), a composite of UBS + UBM, and canine stomach submucosa (SS). This study also compared the mechanical properties of 2- and 4-layer ECM scaffolds. Results showed 2-layer SS devices had the highest ball-burst value of all 2-layer ECM devices. Moreover, all 4-layer ECM devices had similar ball-burst strength except for 4-layer UBM devices which was the weakest. PAA-treatment decreased the ball-burst strength of SS and increased the ball-burst strength of UBS 2-layer devices. This study showed the material properties of the ECM scaffolds could be engineered to mimic those of native soft tissues (i.e. vascular, musculotendinous, etc) by varying the number of layers and modifying the disinfection/sterilization treatments used for manufacturing.<newchar><newabs>21622104<newchar>The adaptive response of endothelial cells to hypoxia involves a substantial remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). In endothelial cells hypoxia up-regulates lysyl oxidase (LOX), a key enzyme in ECM assembly, relevant to vascular homeostasis. However, the mechanism underlying this response has not been established. Hypoxia up-regulated LOX expression in endothelial cells (HUVEC and BAEC) and concomitantly increased LOX enzymatic activity. This effect was independent of autocrine factors released by hypoxic cells and relies on a transcriptional mechanism. Both mTOR blockade and HIF-1alpha knockdown slightly prevented LOX up-regulation by hypoxia, suggesting that HIF-1alpha is only partially responsible for this effect. In fact, serial promoter deletion and mutagenesis studies indicated a limited contribution of the previously described hypoxia response element (-75 bp). Interestingly, Smad over-expression further increased LOX transcriptional activity in endothelial cells exposed to hypoxia. Moreover, the increase in LOX expression triggered by hypoxia was significantly reduced by reactive oxygen species (ROS) inhibitors. Thus, our data support a role of Smad signaling and ROS in the up-regulation of LOX by hypoxia in endothelial cells.<newchar><newabs>19276183<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules modify gene expression through attachment-dependent (focal adhesion-related) integrin receptor signaling. It was previously unknown whether the same molecules acting as soluble peptides could generate signal cascades without the associated mechanical anchoring, a condition that may be encountered during matrix remodeling and degradation and relevant to invasion and metastatic processes. In the current study, the role of ECM ligand-regulated gene expression through this attachment-independent process was examined. It was observed that fibronectin, laminin, and collagen type I and II induce Smad2 activation in MCF-10A and MCF-7 cells. This activation is not caused by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta ligand contamination or autocrine TGF involvement and is 3- to 5-fold less robust than the TGF-beta1 ligand. The resulting nuclear translocation of Smad4 in response to ECM ligand indicates downstream transcriptional responses occurring. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments determined that collagen type II and laminin act through interaction with integrin alpha(2)beta(1) receptor complex. The ECM ligand-induced Smad activation (termed signaling crosstalk) resulted in cell type and ligand-specific transcriptional changes, which are distinct from the TGF-beta ligand-induced responses. These findings show that cell-matrix communication is more complex than previously thought. Soluble ECM peptides drive transcriptional regulation through corresponding adhesion and non-attachment-related processes. The resultant gene expressional patterns correlate with pathway activity and not by the extent of Smad activation. These results extend the complexity and the existing paradigms of ECM-cell communication to ECM ligand regulation without the necessity of mechanical coupling.<newchar><newabs>21402405<newchar>Diabetic skin ulcer is difficult to heal due to the lack of cellular and molecular signals required for normal wound repair. Emulsion electrospinning was adopted to imbed basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) into ultrafine fibers with a core-sheath structure to promote the wound healing process. An initially burst release as low as 14.0 ± 2.2% was achieved, followed by gradual release for around 4 wk. In vitro investigations on mouse embryo fibroblasts indicated that bFGF-loaded fibrous mats enhanced cell adhesion, proliferation, and secretion of extracellular matrix (ECM). Skin wounds were created in the dorsal area of diabetic rats for in vivo evaluation of skin regeneration after covered with bFGF-loaded fibrous mats. Compared with fibrous mats infiltrated with free bFGF, bFGF-loaded scaffolds revealed significantly higher wound recovery rate with complete re-epithelialization and regeneration of skin appendages. Higher density and mature capillary vessels were generated during 2 wk after treatment with bFGF-loaded fibers, and there was no fiber fragment observed in the histological sections at week 4 after operation. The gradual release of bFGF from fibrous mats enhanced collagen deposition and ECM remodeling, and the arrangement and component of collagen fibers were similar to normal tissues. The above results demonstrate the potential use of bFGF-loaded electrospun fibrous mats to rapidly restore the structural and functional properties of wounded skin for patients with diabetic mellitus.<newchar><newabs>22244063<newchar>The molecular changes occurring in rotator cuff tears are still unknown, but much attention has been paid to better understand the role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) in the development of tendinopathy. These are potent enzymes that, once activated, can completely degrade all components of the connective tissue, modify the extracellular matrix (ECM), and mediatethe development of painful tendinopathy and tendon rupture. To control the local activity of activated proteinases, the same cells produce tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP) that bind to the enzymes and prevent degradation. The balance between the activities of MMPs and TIMPs regulates tendon remodeling, whereas an imbalance produces a collagen dis-regulation and disturbances intendons. ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) are cell membrane-linked enzymes with proteolytic and cell signaling functions. ADAMTSs (ADAM with thrombospondin motifs) are secreted into the circulation, and constitute a heterogenous family of proteases with both anabolic and catabolic functions. Biologic modulation of endogenous MMP activity to basal levels may reduce pathologic tissue degradation and favorably influence healing after rotator cuff repair. Further studies are needed to better define the mechanism of action, and whether these new strategies are safe and effective in larger models.<newchar><newabs>18437603<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is strongly favored by the conditions occurring in the inflammatory microenvironment and can lead to pathogenic reactions directed toward the ECM itself. Several reports have described autoimmune responses to ECM molecules in patients with inflammatory diseases whose pathogenesis is not primarily related to ECM autoimmunity. This review will focus on the molecular interplay that governs ECM remodeling during tissue inflammation and will discuss how chronic inflammation can act as a driving force for the induction of autoimmune responses to ECM components as well as how the elicited autoimmunity can sustain local or induce distant tissue damage.<newchar><newabs>15578436<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) serves as a medium for cell-cell interactions and can directly signal cells through cell surface ECM receptors, such as integrins. In addition, many growth factors and signaling molecules are stored in the ECM. Thus, ECM remodeling and/or degradation plays a critical role in cell fate and behavior during many developmental and pathological processes. ECM remodeling/degradation is, to a large extent, mediated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of extracellular or membrane-bound, Zn2+-dependent proteases that are capable of digesting various proteinaceous components of the ECM. Of particular interest among them is the MMP11 or stromelysin-3, which was first isolated as a breast cancer associated protease. Here, we review some evidence for the involvement of this MMP in development and diseases with a special emphasis on amphibian metamorphosis, a postembryonic, thyroid hormone-dependent process that transforms essentially every organ/tissue of the animal.<newchar><newabs>12814943<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) degrade most components of the extracellular matrix (ECM), as well as many non-ECM molecules. MMPs participate in (1). degradation of ECM to allow cell migration; (2). alteration of the ECM microenvironment resulting in alteration in cellular behavior; (3). modulation of biologically active molecules by direct cleavage or release from ECM stores; (4). regulation of the activity of other proteases; and (5). cell attachment, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. We have sought to understand the role of MMPs during development and tissue repair in transgenic mice. Endochondral bone formation presents a particularly interesting developmental challenge. During this process, an avascular tissue (cartilage) is converted into one of the most highly vascularized tissues (bone) in the vertebrate body. Ossification begins with invasion of the calcified hypertrophic cartilage by capillaries. Apoptosis of the terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes, degradation of the cartilage matrix, and deposition of bone matrix by osteoblasts accompanies neovascularization of the growth plate. Remodeling of ECM results in a cavity filled with vascular channels containing hematopoietic cells. Our results reveal that MMP9, MMP13, and vascular endothelial growth factor are key regulators for the remodeling of the skeletal tissues. They coordinate not only matrix degradation, but also the recruitment and differentiation of endothelial cells, osteoclasts, chondroclasts, and osteoprogenitors.<newchar><newabs>21210861<newchar>Owing to limited self-healing capacity, tendon ruptures and healing remain major orthopedic challenges. Increasing evidence suggests that post-traumatic inflammatory responses, and hence, cytokines are involved in both cases, and also in tendon exercise and homeostasis. This review summarizes interrelations known between the cytokines interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α, IL-6 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in tendon to assess their role in tendon damage and healing. Exogenic cytokine sources are blood-derived leukocytes that immigrate in damaged tendon. Endogenous expression of IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6, IL-10 and VEGF was demonstrated in tendon-derived cells. As tendon is a highly mechanosensitive tissue, cytokine homeostasis and cell survival underlie an intimate balance between adequate biomechanical stimuli and disturbance through load deprivation and overload. Multiple interrelations between cytokines and tendon extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis, catabolic mediators e.g. matrix-degrading enzymes, inflammatory and angiogenic factors (COX-2, PGE2, VEGF, NO) and cytoskeleton assembly are evident. Pro-inflammatory cytokines affect ECM homeostasis, accelerate remodeling, amplify biomechanical adaptiveness and promote tenocyte apoptosis. This multifaceted interplay might both contribute to and interfere with healing. Much work must be undertaken to understand the particular interrelation of these inflammatory and regulatory mediators in ruptured tendon and healing, which has relevance for the development of novel immunoregulatory therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>22146870<newchar>The exploitation of cell-instructive scaffolds with uniform physical/chemical surfaces and controlled stiffness will be greatly useful in tissue engineering applications to resemble the extracellular matrix (ECM) or topographical appearance of native tissues. We herein describe a versatile and straightforward method to assemble a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-composite structure in which a uniformly laminin-coated membrane is placed on top of a micropatterned substrate that applies a stiffness gradient. This 'double-sheet' structure provides soft or stiff microdomains that guide the self-patterning of different cell types [e.g. chronic myeloid leukemia (KU812), cervix carcinoma (HeLa), NIH 3T3 and BJ], thereby stimulating their cytoskeletal remodeling. More interestingly, we used these uniform PDMS surfaces with patterned rigidity for obtaining co-cultures of tumor blood cells (KU812) and adherent fibroblasts (NIH 3T3) with spatially-controlled distribution. Thus, beyond single-cell stiffening and mechanosensing, these surfaces should also be used as simple and feasible co-culture systems for mimicking and dissecting the bidirectional interactions between blood cells and specific stromal elements of their in vivo microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>22642192<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), an increasing family of zinc- and calcium-dependent endopeptidases, are involved in both the tissue remodeling and the degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM). These enzymes have been a pharmaceutical target for over 25 years in order to develop many families of therapeutically important synthetic matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors (MMPIs) for the treatment of several serious pathologies. Although clinical trials on most of the MMPIs gave disappointing results, at least one MMPI (Periostat) has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of periodontal disease. Current research efforts on the development of selective inhibitors toward certain MMPs gave a vast number of small molecules as potent MMPIs, of which, some of the effective candidates are in their various stages of (pre)clinical trials for the treatment of various diseases such as arthritis and different cancers. The selectivity of MMPIs toward specific MMPs depends mainly on their structural templates or scaffolds and the variations in their substituents. Thus, the combination of traditional, mechanism-based, and structural-based approaches may help for the future development of specific MMPIs. In recent years, research focuses on the design and development of MMPIs possess a hydroxamic acid moiety, a strong Zn(II)-binding group, which leads to their high-affinity binding to the enzymic sites of the MMPs. We herein discuss the hydroxamic acid-based MMPIs with respect to their mechanism of interaction, structure-activity relationship (SAR), quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), recent development, and clinical trials.<newchar><newabs>19355969<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-hydrolytic enzymes play critical roles in reproduction, development, morphogenesis, wound healing, tissue repair, regeneration, and remodeling. They are also involved in pathological processes such as inflammation, arthritis, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, neurodegeneration, metabolic syndrome, and cancer invasion and metastasis. Other reviews summarized the structure and function of ECM-degrading enzymes in cancer and other diseases. This review will focus on current insights of major protease families and other digestive enzymes that play significant roles in ECM remodeling and ECM-related pathologies. For example, the functions of matrix metalloproteinases in modulating adipogenesis, and their subsequent implications in obese patients, are discussed. Recent discovery and characterization of nineteen members of the human disintegrin-metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motif family have revealed new opportunities of investigating these enzymes in human pathologies, especially in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Although kallikrein-3 was discovered many years ago as prostate specific antigen, the biomarker for detecting human prostate cancer and monitoring its recurrence in patients after surgery, fifteen members of the kallikrein family were reported to participate in physiological and pathological processes. Furthermore, exciting research has been carried out on other important ECM-digestive enzymes, including heparanase, cathepsins, hyaluronidases, and matriptases. Research data have suggested that these enzymes are potential therapeutic targets and biomarkers for cancer, arthritis, obesity, diabetic complications, multiple sclerosis, cardiovascular diseases, cerebral vascular diseases, and many other pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>21339743<newchar>Hepatic fibrosis is the result of chronic liver injuries underlined by diverse etiologies. The massive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins during fibrogenesis leads to structural distortion and functional disruption of the liver. There is currently no effective standard treatment for liver fibrosis. We previously identified a class of imidazolium salts (IMSs) with anti-fibrotic properties in a cell-based screen. In this report, we investigated the anti-fibrotic efficacy and mechanisms of a small IMS, 1,3-diisopropylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (DPIM), in a hepatic fibrosis model induced by bile duct ligation (BDL) in mice. The orally available DPIM was administered to BDL mice via drinking water at three concentrations (0.5, 0.75, and 1 g/l) for 4 weeks. We observed a significant reduction in inflammation and collagen deposition in the liver, which could be mediated by a reduction in the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and by an enhancement in the matrix metalloproteinase-mediated ECM remodeling. The current findings highlight the importance for simultaneously targeting multiple pathways to more effectively attenuate and resolve liver fibrosis and warrant further studies on this compound in additional models of hepatic fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>22242143<newchar>Twist1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is expressed in mesenchymal precursor populations during embryogenesis and in metastatic cancer cells. In the developing heart, Twist1 is highly expressed in endocardial cushion (ECC) valve mesenchymal cells and is down regulated during valve differentiation and remodeling. Previous studies demonstrated that Twist1 promotes cell proliferation, migration, and expression of primitive extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules in ECC mesenchymal cells. Furthermore, Twist1 expression is induced in human pediatric and adult diseased heart valves. However, the Twist1 downstream target genes that mediate increased cell proliferation and migration during early heart valve development remain largely unknown. Candidate gene and global gene profiling approaches were used to identify transcriptional targets of Twist1 during heart valve development. Candidate target genes were analyzed for evolutionarily conserved regions (ECRs) containing E-box consensus sequences that are potential Twist1 binding sites. ECRs containing conserved E-box sequences were identified for Twist1 responsive genes Tbx20, Cdh11, Sema3C, Rab39b, and Gadd45a. Twist1 binding to these sequences in vivo was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, and binding was detected in ECCs but not late stage remodeling valves. In addition identified Twist1 target genes are highly expressed in ECCs and have reduced expression during heart valve remodeling in vivo, which is consistent with the expression pattern of Twist1. Together these analyses identify multiple new genes involved in cell proliferation and migration that are differentially expressed in the developing heart valves, are responsive to Twist1 transcriptional function, and contain Twist1-responsive regulatory sequences.<newchar><newabs>23145071<newchar>Regulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important functional role either in physiological or pathological conditions. The plasminogen activation (PA) system, comprising the uPA and tPA proteases and their inhibitor PAI-1, is one of the main suppliers of extracellular proteolytic activity contributing to tissue remodeling. Although its function in development is well documented, its precise role in mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation in vitro is unknown. We found that the PA system components are expressed at very low levels in undifferentiated ESCs and that upon differentiation uPA activity is detected mainly transiently, whereas tPA activity and PAI-1 protein are maximum in well differentiated cells. Adipocyte formation by ESCs is inhibited by amiloride treatment, a specific uPA inhibitor. Likewise, ESCs expressing ectopic PAI-1 under the control of an inducible expression system display reduced adipogenic capacities after induction of the gene. Furthermore, the adipogenic differentiation capacities of PAI-1(-/-) induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are augmented as compared to wt iPSCs. Our results demonstrate that the control of ESC adipogenesis by the PA system correspond to different successive steps from undifferentiated to well differentiated ESCs. Similarly, skeletal myogenesis is decreased by uPA inhibition or PAI-1 overexpression during the terminal step of differentiation. However, interfering with uPA during days 0 to 3 of the differentiation process augments ESC myotube formation. Neither neurogenesis, cardiomyogenesis, endothelial cell nor smooth muscle formation are affected by amiloride or PAI-1 induction. Our results show that the PA system is capable to specifically modulate adipogenesis and skeletal myogenesis of ESCs by successive different molecular mechanisms.<newchar><newabs>20796170<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is important for both structural integrity and functions of the brain. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play major roles in ECM-remodeling under both physiological and pathological conditions. Reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs (Reck) is a membrane-anchored MMP-regulator implicated in coordinated regulation of pericellular proteolysis. Although patho-physiological importance of MMPs and another group of MMP-regulators, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases, in brain ischemia has been demonstrated, little is known about the role of Reck in this process. In this study, we found that Reck is up-regulated in hippocampus and penumbra of subventricular zone after transient cerebral ischemia in mice. Most of the Reck-positive cells found at day 2 after ischemia are positive for Nestin as well as Ki67 and localized to the CA2 region of the hippocampus. At day 7 after ischemia, the Reck-positive cells increased in number, extended processes, expressed the reactive astrocyte marker GFAP and the neuronal marker NF200, and were widely distributed in the hippocampus. In the mutant mice carrying single functional Reck allele (Reck+/-), tissue damage and cell death after cerebral ischemia were augmented, the recovery of long-term potentiation in the hippocampus was compromised, NR2C subunit of NMDA receptor was up-regulated, gelatinolytic activity of MMPs were up-regulated and laminin-immunoreactivity was reduced. Our data implicate Reck in protection of ECM/tissue integrity and promotion of functional recovery in the brain after transient cerebral ischemia.<newchar><newabs>20577896<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in cell-cell communication and signaling, and the signals it propagates are important for tissue remodeling and survival. However, signals from disease-altered ECM may lead to anoikis-apoptotic cell death triggered by loss of ECM contacts. Previously, we found that an altered fibronectin matrix triggers anoikis in human primary ligament cells via a pathway that requires p53 transcriptional downregulation. Here we show that this p53 reduction is suppressed by transfecting cells with Mdm2 antisense oligonucleotides or small interfering RNA. Similar results were found in cells treated to prevent p53 and Mdm2 interactions. When p53 was overexpressed in cells lacking Mdm2 and p53, p53 levels were unaffected by anoikis conditions. However, cells cotransfected with p53 and wild type Mdm2, but not a mutant Mdm2, exhibited decreased p53 levels in response to anoikis conditions. Thus, cells under anoikis conditions undergo p53 degradation that is mediated by Mdm2.<newchar><newabs>20506274<newchar>Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) regulate myocardial remodeling by proliferating, differentiating, and secreting extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is anti-fibrotic, inhibits collagen production, augments matrix metalloproteinases, and suppresses CF proliferation. Recently, we demonstrated that the ECM protein fibronectin (FN) augmented production of BNP's second messenger, 3', 5' cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) in CFs, supporting crosstalk between FN, BNP, and its receptor, natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPR-A). Here, we address the specificity of FN to augment cGMP generation by investigating other matrix proteins, including collagen IV which contains RGD motifs and collagen I and poly-L-lysine, which have no RGD domain. Collagen IV showed increased cGMP generation to BNP similar to FN. Collagen I and poly-L-lysine had no effect. As FN also interacts with integrins, we then examined the effect of integrin receptor antibody blockade on BNP-mediated cGMP production. On FN plates, antibodies blocking RGD-binding domains of several integrin subtypes had little effect, while a non-RGD domain interfering integrin alphavbeta3 antibody augmented cGMP production. Further, on uncoated plates, integrin alphavbeta3 blockade continued to potentiate the BNP/cGMP response. These studies suggest that both RGD containing ECM proteins and integrins may interact with BNP/NPR-A to modulate cGMP generation.<newchar><newabs>22427827<newchar>Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune inflammatory and destructive joint disorder that affects tens of millions of people worldwide. Normal healthy joints maintain a balance between the synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules and the proteolytic degradation of damaged ones. In the case of RA, this balance is shifted toward matrix destruction due to increased production of cleavage enzymes and the presence of (autoimmune) immunoglobulins resulting from an inflammation induced immune response. Herein we demonstrate that a polyclonal antibody against the proteoglycan biglycan (BG) causes tissue destruction that may be analogous to that of RA affected tissues. The effect of the antibody is more potent than harsh chemical and/or enzymatic treatments designed to mimic arthritis-like fibril de-polymerization. In RA cases, the immune response to inflammation causes synovial fibroblasts, monocytes and macrophages to produce cytokines and secrete matrix remodeling enzymes, whereas B cells are stimulated to produce immunoglobulins. The specific antigen that causes the RA immune response has not yet been identified, although possible candidates have been proposed, including collagen types I and II, and proteoglycans (PG's) such as biglycan. We speculate that the initiation of RA associated tissue destruction in vivo may involve a similar non-enzymatic decomposition of collagen fibrils via the immunoglobulins themselves that we observe here ex vivo.<newchar><newabs>20186964<newchar>An important hallmark of tissue remodeling is the dynamic turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM). ECM performs a variety of functions in tissue repair including scaffold formation, modulation of fluid dynamics, and regulating cell behavior. During non-infectious tissue injury ECM degradation products are generated that acquire signaling functions not attributable to the native precursor molecules. Hyaluronan (HA) is a non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan which is produced in great abundance following tissue injury. It exists both in a soluble form and as side chains on proteoglycans. HA has critical roles in development as well as a variety of biological processes including wound healing, tumor growth and metastasis, and inflammation. HA fragments share structural similarities with pathogens and following tissue injury can be recognized by innate immune receptors. Elucidating the protean roles of HA in tissue injury, inflammation, and repair will generate new insights into mechanisms of diseases characterized by chronic inflammation and tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>14562268<newchar>This paper reviews our current state of knowledge of the roles the small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs) play in the formation of connective tissue and mineralised tissue matrices. Both, the SLRPs biglycan and decorin are highly expressed in extracellular bone matrix and there is now substantial evidence to support an increasing role for biglycan and decorin in influencing bone cell differentiation and proliferative activity. In addition decorin and biglycan have been implicated in regulating mineral deposition and crystal morphology, whilst decorin has also roles in organic matrix assembly. In order to further assess the role of these SLRPs during bone formation we have initiated studies investigating primary bone cell culture models from rats (bone marrow stromal cells, and bone cells from alveolar bone explants), and identified periods relating to cell proliferation, organic matrix deposition, remodeling of the osteoid, and mineral deposition. Analysis of mRNA levels and the nature of the proteoglycan demonstrated that dermatan sulphate substituted biglycan was expressed during phases relating to cell proliferation, ceased at early matrix deposition, and then biglycan was re-expressed at the onset of mineralisation, but was conjugated to chondroitin sulphate. Decorin was expressed later than biglycan, was associated with early matrix deposition, but then continued to the mineralisation stages. Again, dermatan sulphate-decorin prevailed earlier within osteoid matrix, whilst chondroitin sulphate-decorin predominated later within the mineralizing matrix. The nature of the GAG chain conjugated to SLRP and the timing of its expression would seem to dictate the functions biglycan and decorin play in bone formation.<newchar><newabs>23056273<newchar>Liver fibrosis is characterized by the deposition and increased turnover of extracellular matrix. This process is controlled by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), whose expression and activity dynamically change during injury progression. MMP-19, one of the most widely expressed MMPs, is highly expressed in liver; however, its contribution to liver pathology is unknown. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role of MMP-19 during the development and resolution of fibrosis by comparing the response of MMP-19-deficient (MMP19KO) and wild-type mice upon chronic liver CCl(4)-intoxication. We show that loss of MMP-19 was beneficial during liver injury, as plasma ALT and AST levels, deposition of fibrillar collagen, and phosphorylation of SMAD3, a TGF-ß1 signaling molecule, were all significantly lower in MMP19KO mice. The ameliorated course of the disease in MMP19KO mice likely results from a slower rate of basement membrane destruction and ECM remodeling as the knockout mice maintained significantly higher levels of type IV collagen and lower expression and activation of MMP-2 after 4 weeks of CCl(4)-intoxication. Hastened liver regeneration in MMP19KO mice was associated with slightly higher IGF-1 mRNA expression, slightly increased phosphorylation of Akt kinase, decreased TGF-ß1 mRNA levels and significantly reduced SMAD3 phosphorylation. In addition, primary hepatocytes isolated from MMP19KO mice showed impaired responsiveness towards TGF-ß1 stimulation, resulting in lower expression of Snail1 and vimentin mRNA. Thus, MMP-19-deficiency improves the development of hepatic fibrosis through the diminished replacement of physiological extracellular matrix with fibrotic deposits in the beginning of the injury, leading to subsequent changes in TGF-ß and IGF-1 signaling pathways.<newchar><newabs>15868912<newchar>Osteosarcoma cells are involved in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that affects their growth, invasive and metastatic activities. The tumour ECM provided effective protection against chemotherapy agents in several previously studied malignancies. The current study examined the effects of doxorubicin on cells that were migrated into a 3-dimensional extracellular matrix gel (ECM-gel) in comparison with its effects on cells remaining in the monolayer compartment. A human osteosarcoma cell line (OSCORT) was treated with doxorubicin in monolayer culture for 4 or 24 hours, and then overlaid by ECM-gel for 24 hours. Tumour cells remaining in the monolayer were separated from the cells migrated into ECM-gel, and both of them were characterized. OSCORT cells migrated into ECM-gel showed elevated levels and activity of topoisomerase II, increased protein expression of beta1 integrin and matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity. Doxorubicin treatment for 4 hours resulted in increased cytotoxicity in the monolayer compartment relative to the cells migrated into ECM-gel, whereas 24-hour treatment at a low concentration (0.01 microg/ml) showed an antimigratory effect. Different antiproliferative and antimigratory effects of doxorubicin treatment schedules warrant short-term, high-dose treatment for targeting the tumour growth, and long-term, low-dose treatment for targeting the invasion of osteosarcoma.<newchar><newabs>15052653<newchar>Our previous studies suggested that a part of bone extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules are degraded and remodeled during embryonic bone formation. In contrast, little is known about ECM remodeling in postnatal appositional bone formation. The present study was designed to investigate expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) during experimentally initiated appositional bone formation in rats. Expressions of ECM molecules, MMPs, and TIMPs were examined using in situ hybridization. Osteoblasts and osteocytes expressed MMP2 and -8, TIMP1, -2, and -3, as well as type I collagen, osteopontin, and osteocalcin in the course of the appositional bone formation, while they showed few transcripts of MMP13. The results indicated that while osteoblasts and osteocytes in the apposed bone produce ECM molecules, they degrade ECM molecules with MMPs and regulate the degradation by inhibiting the activity of MMPs using TIMPs. Osteoblasts and osteocytes may reorganize the ECM composition to mature the bone matrix in appositional bone formation.<newchar><newabs>25851222<newchar>In chronic congestive heart failure, an illness affecting more than 4 million Americans, there is extensive myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Failing human ventricular myocardium contains activated matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) which are involved in adverse ECM remodeling. Our studies support the concept that impaired ECM remodeling and MMP activation are, in part, responsible for the cardiac structural deformation during heart failure. There is no known program which has declared its aim the investigation of regulation of fibrosis in hypertrophy and disruption of ECM in cardiac dilatation and failure. The development of transgenic technology, and emerging techniques for in vivo gene transfer, suggest a strategy for improving cardiac function by overexpressing or down regulation of the ECM components such as MMPs, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ), decorin, collagen, and integrins in heart failure.<newchar><newabs>17651862<newchar>Migration, proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes are important processes during tissue regeneration and wound healing of the skin. Here, we focussed on proteases that contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling as a prerequisite of keratinocyte migration. In particular, we assessed the significance of the mammalian cysteine peptidase cathepsin B for human keratinocytes during regeneration from scratch wounding. We describe the construction of a scratch apparatus that allows applying scratches of defined length, width and depth to cultured cells in a reproducible fashion. The rationale for our approach derived from our previous work where we have shown that HaCaT keratinocytes secrete cathepsin B into the extracellular space during spontaneous and induced migration. Here, we observed rapid removal of type IV collagen from underneath lamellipodial extensions of keratinocytes at the advancing fronts of regenerating monolayers, indicating that proteolytic ECM remodeling starts upon initiation of keratinocyte migration. Furthermore, we verified our previous results with HaCaT cells by using normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) and show that non-cell-permeant cathepsin B-specific inhibitors delayed full regeneration of the monolayers from scratch wounding in both cell systems, HaCaT and NHEK. Application of a single dose of cathepsin B inhibitor directly after scratch wounding of keratinocytes demonstrated that cathepsin B is essential during initial stages of wound healing, while its contribution to the subsequent processes of proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes was of less significance. This notion was supported by our observation that the cathepsin B inhibitors used in this study did not affect proliferation rates of keratinocytes of regenerating cultures. Thus, we conclude that cathepsin B is indeed involved in ECM remodeling after its secretion from migrating keratinocytes. Cathepsin B might directly cleave ECM constituents or it may initiate proteolytic cascades that involve other proteases with the ability to degrade ECM components. Because cathepsin B is important for enabling migration of both, HaCaT cells and NHEK, our results support the notion that HaCaT keratinocytes represent an excellent cell culture model for analysis of human epidermal skin keratinocyte migration.<newchar><newabs>14756248<newchar>Tooth eruption involves extensive degradation and reorganization of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. It is not known how ECM-degrading enzymes are coordinated with each other or how they are regulated in the event. The present study was designed to investigate mRNA expression of inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) in comparison with matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) as well as ECM molecules during rat first molar eruption using in situ hybridization. We also examined how TIMPs are involved in the process of tooth eruption, root formation, cementogenesis and alveolar bone remodelling. Expressions of type-I collagen, osteocalcin, MMPs 2 and 8, and TIMPs 1, 2 and 3 were shown in osteoblasts, osteocytes, cementoblasts, cementocytes and periodontal ligament fibroblasts, and the concomitant high expressions of the ECM molecules, MMPs and TIMPs in alveolar bone, cementum and periodontal ligaments were identified in the middle of first molar eruption. The remodelling of ECM in these periodontal tissues might be regulated through balance among the production of ECM molecules, the degradation of ECM by MMPs and the inhibition of MMPs by TIMPs during tooth eruption.<newchar><newabs>20181883<newchar>Infection with the parasitic helminth Schistosoma mansoni causes significant liver fibrosis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are important regulators of the ECM by regulating cellular inflammation, extracellular matrix deposition, and tissue reorganization. MMP12 is a macrophage-secreted elastase that is highly induced in the liver and lung in response to S. mansoni eggs, confirmed by both DNA microarray and real-time PCR analysis. However, the function of MMP12 in chronic helminth-induced inflammation and fibrosis is unclear. In this study, we reveal that MMP12 acts as a potent inducer of inflammation and fibrosis after infection with the helminth parasite S. mansoni. Surprisingly, the reduction in liver and lung fibrosis in MMP12-deficient mice was not associated with significant changes in cytokine, chemokine, TGF-beta1, or tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase expression. Instead, we observed marked increases in MMP2 and MMP13 expression, suggesting that Mmp12 was promoting fibrosis by limiting the expression of specific ECM-degrading MMPs. Interestingly, like MMP12, MMP13 expression was highly dependent on IL-13 and type II-IL-4 receptor signaling. However, in contrast to MMP12, expression of MMP13 was significantly suppressed by the endogenous IL-13 decoy receptor, IL-13Ralpha2. In the absence of MMP12, expression of IL-13Ralpha2 was significantly reduced, providing a possible explanation for the increased IL-13-driven MMP13 activity and reduced fibrosis. As such, these data suggest important counter-regulatory roles between MMP12 and ECM-degrading enzymes like MMP2, MMP9, and MMP13 in Th2 cytokine-driven fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>20945383<newchar>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by myofibroblast accumulation, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, and excessive collagen deposition. ECM-producing myofibroblasts may originate from epithelial cells through epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-β1 is an inducer of EMT in pulmonary epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo, though the mechanisms are unclear. We hypothesized that TGF-β1 induced EMT through Smad-dependent and -independent processes. To test this hypothesis, we studied the roles and mechanisms of TGF-β1-induced Smad and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling in EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells. Exposure of pulmonary epithelial 1HAEo(-) cells to TGF-β1 resulted in morphological and molecular changes of EMT over a 96-h period; loss of cell-cell contact, cell elongation, down-regulation of E-cadherin, up-regulation of fibronectin, and up-regulation of collagen I. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK signaling pathways were activated by TGF-β1. However, neither Smad2/3 nor p38 MAPK were required for the down-regulation of E-cadherin, yet p38 MAPK was associated with fibronectin up-regulation. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK had a role in regulation of TGF-β1-induced collagen expression. Furthermore, these data demonstrate that Smads and p38 MAPK differentially regulate EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells.<newchar><newabs>20221893<newchar>Current evidence indicates that extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is a component of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) has a role in early atherosclerosis, plaque rupture and myocardial infarction (MI). The necessity of inhibition of ECM remodeling and subsequent injuries in patients with AMI suggests that MMP might be involved in this task. Therefore, we investigated the activities of MMP-1, -2, -3, and -9 which play an important role in AMI. Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 50 patients with AMI were isolated from peripheral blood after the onset of AMI within 24 h, comparing with 50 control subjects. The active form of MMPs was measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); MMP proteins presence and expression by immunoblotting and zymography analysis; and mRNA expression of MMPs by real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Plasma concentrations of MMPs increase in patients rather than control subjects. Gel zymography revealed 43, 66, 45, and 83 kDa molecular weight bands which consistent with active MMP-1, -2, -3, and -9, respectively, exhibiting gelatin-degrading activity in both patient and control subjects. No up-regulation of mRNA expression was found. To our knowledge, it is the first monitoring of MMP gene and protein expression and also circulating active MMPs in Iranian patients with AMI and normal subjects. Up-regulation of MMPs activity is common in the falling myocardium and missing up-regulation of transcription indicates that protein levels of MMPs were regulated at the post transcriptional level.<newchar><newabs>21800433<newchar>The purpose of the current study was to investigate whether the cryopolymerization technique is capable of producing suitable scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Cryopolymers made of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate and acrylic acid with (W1 and W20) and without (W0) wollastonite particles were prepared. The elastic modulus of the specimens rose one order of magnitude from W1 to W20. Total porosity reached 56% for W0, 72% for W1 and 36% for W20, with pore sizes of up to 2 mm, large interconnection sizes of up to 1 mm and small interconnection sizes of 50-80 µm on dry specimens. Cryogels swell up to 224 ± 17% for W0, 315 ± 18% for W1 and 231 ± 27% for W20 specimens, while maintaining the integrity of the bodies. Pore sizes &gt; 5 mm can be observed for swollen specimens. The biocompatibility of the samples was tested using human mesenchymal stem cells isolated from bone marrow and adipose tissues. Both types of cells attached and grew on the three tested substrates, colonized their inner regions and organized an extracellular cell matrix. Fibronectin and osteopontin levels decreased in the media from cells cultured on W20 samples, likely due to increased binding on the ECM deposited by cells. The osteoprotegerin-to-receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand secretion ratios increased with increasing wollastonite content. Altogether, these results indicate that an appropriate balance of surface properties and structure that favours stromal cell colonization in the porous cryogels can be achieved by modulating the amount of wollastonite.<newchar><newabs>17518717<newchar>Extracellular matrix scaffolds derived from porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS-ECM) have been shown to promote the formation of site-specific tissue in a number of preclinical animal studies. However, this constructive remodeling process requires that the scaffold be subjected to a site-specific mechanical environment. The specific quantitative effects of mechanical loading on the gene expression patterns of fibroblasts seeded on SIS-ECM are unknown and yet very important in the tissue remodeling process. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the expression of collagen type I (Col I), collagen type III (Col III), smooth muscle actin (SMA), tenascin-C (TN-C), matrix metalloprotease-2 (MMP-2), matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9), transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), and transforming growth factor-beta3 (TGF-beta3) by fibroblasts subjected to various magnitudes (0%, 5%, 10%, and 15%) and frequencies (0.1 Hz, 0.3 Hz, and 0.5 Hz) of stretch. A new cyclic-stretching tissue culture (CSTC) system was developed. This system consists of eight independently controlled culture chambers that can be operated in a sterile incubator. Each chamber includes a load cell so that the load in each scaffold can be monitored. It was found that different stretching regimens led to complex and distinctive patterns of gene expression by fibroblasts seeded onto SIS-ECM. In general, the fibroblasts increased expression of Col I up to 5-fold and decreased that of Col III with increased frequency of stretch. In addition, the fibroblasts exhibited a contractile phenotype with increased expression of SMA, TN-C, and TGF-beta1. These findings support the concept that the mechanical environment of a remodeling ECM scaffold may have substantial effects on the behavior of cells within the scaffold and contribute to the site-specific tissue remodeling that has been observed in in vivo studies.<newchar><newabs>11357192<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) functions as the structural support of cells and as a medium for cell-cell interactions. It is understood to play critical roles in development. ECM remodeling is mediated largely through the action of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of Zn2+-dependent proteases capable of degrading various proteinaceous components of the ECM. MMPs are expressed in many developmental and pathologic processes. However, few studies have been carried out to investigate the function of MMPs during embryogenesis and postembryonic organogenesis. By using Xenopus development as a model system, we have previously shown that several MMP genes are expressed from neurulation to the completion of embryogenesis in distinct tissues/organs, suggesting that ECM remodeling during mid- to late embryogenesis occurs in an organ-specific manner. By using the recently developed transgenic technology for Xenopus laevis, we overexpressed Xenopus MMPs stromelysin-3 (ST3) and collagenase-4 (Col4) under the control of a ubiquitous promoter and observed that embryos with overexpressed ST3 or Col4, but not the control green fluorescent protein (GFP), died in a dose-dependent manner during late embryogenesis. The specificity of this embryonic lethal phenotype was confirmed by the failure of a catalytically inactive mutant of ST3 to affect development. Finally, overexpression of a mammalian membrane type-MMP also led to late embryonic lethality in Xenopus embryos, suggesting that membrane type-MMPs have functions in vivo for ECM remodeling, in addition to being activators of other pro-MMPs. These data together with the developmental expression of several MMPs during Xenopus development, suggest that MMPs play important roles during mid- to late embryogenesis and that proper regulation of MMP genes is critical for tissue morphogenesis and organogenesis.<newchar><newabs>11796737<newchar>Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is pivotal for various biological processes, including organ morphology and development. The Caenorhabditis elegans male tail has male-specific copulatory organs, the rays and the fan. Ray morphogenesis, which involves a rapid remodeling of the ECM, is an important model of morphogenesis, although its mechanism is poorly understood. ADAMTS (a disintegrin-like and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type I motifs) is a novel metalloproteinase family that is thought to be an important regulator for ECM remodeling during development and pathological states. We report here that a new C. elegans ADAMTS family gene, adt-1, plays an important regulatory role in ray morphogenesis. Inactivation of the adt-1 gene resulted in morphological changes in the rays as well as the appearance of abnormal protuberances around the rays. In addition, mating ability was remarkably impaired in adt-1 deletion mutant males. Furthermore, we found that the green fluorescent protein reporter driven by the adt-1 promoter was specifically expressed throughout the rays in the male tail. We hypothesize that ADT-1 controls the ray extension process via remodeling of the ECM in the cuticle.<newchar><newabs>19686759<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) components play essential roles in development, remodeling, and signaling in the cardiovascular system. They are also important in determining the mechanics of blood vessels, valves, pericardium, and myocardium. The goal of this brief review is to summarize available information regarding the mechanical contributions of ECM in the myocardium. Fibrillar collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans all play crucial mechanical roles in many tissues in the body generally and in the cardiovascular system specifically. The myocardium contains all three components, but their mechanical contributions are relatively poorly understood. Most studies of ECM contributions to myocardial mechanics have focused on collagen, but quantitative prediction of mechanical properties of the myocardium, or changes in those properties with disease, from measured tissue structure is not yet possible. Circumstantial evidence suggests that the mechanics of cardiac elastin and proteoglycans merit further study. Work in other tissues used a combination of correlation, modification or digestion, and mathematical modeling to establish mechanical roles for specific ECM components; this work can provide guidance for new experiments and modeling studies in myocardium.<newchar><newabs>20683677<newchar>A clear association between obesity and heart failure exists and a significant role for leptin, the product of the obese gene, has been suggested. One aspect of myocardial remodeling which characterizes heart failure is a disruption in the balance of extracellular matrix synthesis and degradation. Here we investigated the effects of leptin on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) expression, as well as collagen synthesis in HL-1 cardiac muscle cells. Gelatin zymographic analysis of MMP activity in conditioned media showed that leptin enhanced MMP-2 activity in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Leptin is known to stimulate phosphorylation of p38 MAPK in cardiac cells and utilization of the p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580, demonstrated that this kinase also plays a role in regulating several extracellular matrix components, such that inhibition of p38 MAPK signaling prevented the leptin-induced increase in MMP-2 activation. We also observed that leptin enhanced collagen synthesis determined by both proline incorporation and picrosirius red staining of conditioned media. Pro-collagen type-I and pro-collagen type-III expression, measured by real-time PCR and Western blotting were also increased by leptin, effects which were again attenuated by SB203580. In summary, these results demonstrate the potential for leptin to play a role in mediating myocardial ECM remodeling and that the p38 MAPK pathway plays an important role in mediating these effects.<newchar><newabs>21870330<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by cartilage attrition, subchondral bone remodeling, osteophyte formation and synovial inflammation. Perturbed homeostasis caused by inflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and proapoptotic/antiapoptotic dysregulation is known to impair chondrocyte survival in joint microenvironments and contribute to OA pathogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the programmed cell death (apoptosis) of chondral cells are not yet well defined. The present study was conducted to evaluate apoptosis of chondrocytes from knee articular cartilage of patients with OA. The aim of this study was to investigate and compare the apoptosis through the expression of caspase-3 in tissue explants, in cells cultured in monolayer, and in cells encapsulated in a hydrogel (PEGDA) scaffold. Chondrocytes were also studied following cell isolation and encapsulation in poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) hydrogels. Specifically, articular cartilage specimens were assessed by histology (Hematoxlyn and Eosin) and histochemistry (Safranin-O and Alcian Blue). The effector of apoptosis caspase-3 was studied through immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry and immunofluorescence. DNA strand breaks were evaluated in freshly isolated chondrocytes from human OA cartilage using the TUNEL assay, and changes in nuclear morphology of apoptotic cells were detected by staining with Hoechst 33258. The results showed an increased expression of caspase-3 in tissue explants, in pre-confluent cells and after four passages in culture, and a decreased expression of caspase-3 comparable to control cartilage in cells encapsulated in hydrogels (PEGDA) after 5 weeks in culture. The freshly isolated chondrocytes were TUNEL positive. The chondrocytes after 5 weeks of culture in hydrogels (PEGDA) showed the formation of new hyaline cartilage with increased cell growth, cellular aggregations and extracellular matrix (ECM) production. This is of particular relevance to the use of OA cells and tissue engineering in the therapeutic approach to patients.<newchar><newabs>21851816<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, including collagen and growth factors, are greatly increased in tissue fibrosis and mainly secreted by fibroblasts. We previously demonstrated that muscle-derived fibroblasts from Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients have a profibrotic phenotype, that includes significantly reduced expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease 3 (TIMP-3) compared to control. Since TIMP-3 induces apoptosis in various cell types, we hypothesized increased resistance of DMD fibroblasts to apoptosis. To address this, we evaluated apoptotic nuclei, caspase 3, caspase 3 substrate expression, and migration and adhesion properties of muscle-derived fibroblasts, after applying different apoptosis-inducing treatments. We found that DMD fibroblasts were less susceptible to cell death, more adhesive, and had greater tendency to migrate than control fibroblasts - findings further supported by alterations in FAK and ERK/MAPK expression. Resistance to apoptosis and greater adhesion are likely to contribute to muscle fibrosis so a pharmacological treatment that targets dysregulated pathways involved in cell detachment apoptosis (anoikis) may limit the progressive fibrotic remodeling characteristic of DMD.<newchar><newabs>20452131<newchar>For significant improvements to occur in the survival of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), it is necessary to develop novel and more precisely targeted therapies. The selection of future appropriate regimens must critically depend on improved characterization of the molecules driving the pathogenesis of IPF. It is well defined that IPF is characterized by the expression of genes indicating an active tissue remodeling program, including extracellular matrix (ECM) and basement membrane components, as well as myofibroblast-associated and epithelial cell-related genes. A few recent advances are worth mentioning. Pulmonary research demonstrates abnormal expression of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding proteins (IGFBPs) in IPF, including human IPF bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and BAL fluids, human IPF fibroblasts, as well as fibrotic lung tissues of bleomycin-induced mice and IPF patients, analyzed by microarray, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), ribonuclease protection assay (RPA), Western blot, immunohistochemistry, or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Simultaneously, in vitro and in vivo studies indicate the involvement of IGFBPs in the initiation and development of the fibrosis process, including fibroblast activation and transdifferentiation to a myofibroblast phenotype, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), increased ECM production, and decreased ECM degradation, possibly contributing to the final lung fibrosis. These observations suggest that dysregulation of IGFBPs may be a key factor responsible for the initiation and perpetuation of IPF. Such efforts could lead to potential candidate molecules being exploited for therapeutic manipulation.<newchar><newabs>20530752<newchar>Radiofrequency (RF) ablation of the myocardium causes discrete sites of injury. RF scars can expand, altering the extracellular matrix (ECM) structure and the continuity of the electrical syncytium of the adjacent myocardium. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), such as MMP-9, contribute to ECM remodeling. However, whether and to what degree transcriptional induction of MMP-9 occurs after myocardial RF injury and the association with electrical conduction patterns after RF injury remains unexplored. This study examined MMP-9 gene promoter (M9PROM) activation after myocardial RF injury using mice in which the M9PROM was fused to a β-galactosidase (β-gal) reporter. RF lesions (0.5-mm probe, 80°C, 30 s) were created on the left ventricular (LV) epicardium of M9PROM mice (n=62) and terminally studied at 1 h, 1 d, 3 d, 7 d, 14 d, and 28 d after RF injury. M9PROM activation was localized through β-gal staining. The RF scar area and the area of β-gal staining were measured and normalized to LV area (planimetry). RF scar size increased from 1 h post-RF-injury values by 7 d and remained higher at 28 d. M9PROM activation became evident at 3 d and peaked at 7 d. Electrical conduction was measured (potentiometric dye mapping) at 7 d after RF injury. Heterogeneities in action potentials and electrical impulse propagation coincident with M9PROM activation were observed after RF injury. For example, conduction proximal to the RF site was slower than that in the remote myocardium (0.15±0.02 vs. 0.83±0.08 mm/ms, P&lt;0.05). Thus, a unique spatiotemporal pattern of MMP-9 transcriptional activation occurred after discrete myocardial injury, which was associated with the development of electrical heterogeneity. Therefore, these findings suggest that changes in a key determinant of extracellular matrix remodeling, in addition to changes in myocardial structure, can contribute to arrhythmogenesis around the region of myocardial injury.<newchar><newabs>17298979<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) undergoes continuous remodeling during mammalian development. Although involvement of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in ECM degradation has been well documented, how this process is regulated to allow proper ECM accumulation remains unclear. We previously showed the involvement of a membrane-anchored MMP regulator, RECK (reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs), in vascular development in mice. Here we report that Reck mRNA can be detected in developing cartilage in E13.5 approximately 16.5 mouse embryos and is progressively upregulated during differentiation of a chondrogenic cell line ATDC5 in vitro. In the early phase of ATDC5 differentiation, RECK expression stays low, multiple MMPs are upregulated, and there is ECM degradation at the sites of cellular condensation. In the later phase, RECK is upregulated inside the expanding cartilaginous nodules where type II collagen is accumulated while active ECM degradation persists along the rim of the nodules. Constitutive RECK expression suppressed initial cellular condensation, whereas RECK knockdown suppressed the later ECM accumulation in the cartilaginous nodules. These results suggest that RECK expression at the right place (in the core of the nodules) and at the right time (only in the later phase) is important for proper chondrogenesis and that RECK, together with MMPs, plays a crucial role in regulating dynamic processes of tissue morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>22052037<newchar>Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is characterized by the absence of dystrophin in muscles. A therapeutic approach to restore dystrophin expression in DMD patient's muscles is the transplantation of muscle precursor cells (MPCs). However, this transplantation is limited by the low MPC capacity to migrate beyond the injection trajectory. Matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are key regulatory molecules in the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. MPCs over-expressing MMP-9 were tested by zymography, migration and invasion assays in vitro and by transplantation in mouse muscle. In vitro, MPCs over-expressing MMP-9 have a better invasion capacity than control MPCs. When these cells are transplanted in mouse muscles, the transplantation success is increased by more than 50% and their dispersion is higher than normal cells. MMP-9 over-expression could thus be an approach to improve cell transplantation in DMD patients by increasing the dispersion capacity of transplanted cells.<newchar><newabs>15761961<newchar>Cancer development is essentially a tissue remodeling process in which normal tissue is substituted with cancer tissue. A crucial role in this process is attributed to proteolytic degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Degradation of ECM is initiated by proteases, secreted by different cell types, participating in tumor cell invasion and increased expression or activity of every known class of proteases (metallo-, serine-, aspartyl-, and cysteine) has been linked to malignancy and invasion of tumor cells. Proteolytic enzymes can act directly by degrading ECM or indirectly by activating other proteases, which then degrade the ECM. They act in a determined order, resulting from the order of their activation. When proteases exert their action on other proteases, the end result is a cascade leading to proteolysis. Presumable order of events in this complicated cascade is that aspartyl protease (cathepsin D) activates cysteine proteases (e.g. cathepsin B) that can activate pro-uPA. Then active uPA can convert plasminogen into plasmin. Cathepsin B as well as plasmin are capable of degrading several components of tumor stroma and may activate zymogens of matrix metalloproteinases, the main family of ECM degrading proteases. The activities of these proteases are regulated by a complex array of activators, inhibitors and cellular receptors. In physiological conditions the balance exists between proteases and their inhibitors. Proteolytic-antiproteolytic balance may be of major significance in the cancer development. One of the reasons for such a situation is enhanced generation of free radicals observed in many pathological states. Free radicals react with main cellular components like proteins and lipids and in this way modify proteolytic-antiproteolytic balance and enable penetration damaging cellular membrane. All these lead to enhancement of proteolysis and destruction of ECM proteins and in consequence to invasion and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>11886654<newchar>Implantation of mice with xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) not only results in tissue remodeling but also elicits a strong Th2 immune response. It is possible that the Th2 cytokines induced by ECM act systemically and result in immune suppression to unrelated antigens. In this case, the recipient would be predisposed to immune dysfunction and have increased susceptibility to various pathogens. The purpose of this study was to determine if ECM implantation does, in fact, influence the immune response to other antigens. Four models were examined to determine the effects of ECM implantation on systemic immunity. In the first model, mice were subcutaneously implanted with porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) and immunized with a T-dependent subunit vaccine against influenza virus. The antibody response and protection against lethal infection were then measured. The second model consisted of similar experiments performed using a T-independent polysaccharide vaccine against S. pneumoniae. In the third model, mice were implanted and the cell-mediated response to dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB) challenge was determined. The fourth model involved examining the influence of SIS implantation on rejection of xenogeneic skin grafts. We found that antibody levels of mice vaccinated against influenza virus or S. pneumoniae were not affected by SIS implantation and these mice did not exhibit increased or decreased susceptibility to either infectious agent. Similarly, mice implanted with ECM showed no cell-mediated immune dysfunction upon challenge with DNFB or xenogeneic skin grafts. The results of this study demonstrate that the Th2-restricted response induced by xenogeneic ECM implantation does not cause generalized immune suppression. Therefore, SIS implantation does not increase susceptibility to viral or bacterial pathogenic agents.<newchar><newabs>18216330<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) regulates cell behavior by influencing cell proliferation, survival, shape, migration and differentiation. Far from being a static structure, the ECM is constantly undergoing remodeling--i.e. assembly and degradation--particularly during the normal processes of development, differentiation and wound repair. When misregulated, this can contribute to disease. ECM assembly is regulated by the 3D environment and the cellular tension that is transmitted through integrins. Degradation is controlled by complex proteolytic cascades, and misregulation of these results in ECM damage that is a common component of many diseases. Tissue engineering strives to replace damaged tissues with stem cells seeded on synthetic structures designed to mimic the ECM and thus restore the normal control of cell function. Stem cell self-renewal and differentiation is influenced by the 3D environment within the stem cell niche. For tissue-engineering strategies to be successful, the intimate dynamic relationship between cells and the ECM must be understood to ensure appropriate cell behavior.<newchar><newabs>18548232<newchar>Remodeling of the pulmonary artery is a major feature of pulmonary artery hypertension, and CPU86017, a derivative of berberine, is known to effectively alleviate hypoxic pulmonary hypertension (HPH). CPU86017 is a racemate, possessing two chiral centers: 7N and 13aC. We have compared the effects of four CPU86017 isomers, SS [(+)-7S, 13aS-CPU86017], SR [(-)-7S, 13aR-CPU86017], RR [(-)-7R, 13aR-CPU86017] and RS [(+)-7R, 13aS-CPU86017], on HPH. Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to hypoxic conditions (10 +/- 0.5% O2 for 8 h per day) for 4 weeks and treated with CPU86017, SS, SR, RR or RS (4 mg/kg, subcutaneously) from day 15 to 28. After 4 weeks of exposure to hypoxia, remodeling of the right ventricle and the small pulmonary arteries (&lt;150 microm) was very pronounced, and extra-cellular matrix (ECM) had been excessively produced in association with abnormal mRNA and protein expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and mRNA of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 2 (TIMP1, TIMP2). Expression of endothelin receptor A was upregulated, while that connexin 40 was downregulated. The administration of CPU86017 and its four isomers attenuated the changes, with the isomer RS exhibiting the most favorable effect on HPH rats. We propose that an activated endothelin pathway associated with an unbalanced MMP-TIMP system may contribute to the over-accumulation of ECM and the remodeling of the pulmonary arterioles in HPH. CPU86017 and its four isomers attenuate ECM accumulation and vascular remodeling by normalizing both the MMP-TIMP system and the ET system. The RS isomer is superior to the racemate CPU86017 in attenuating HPH.<newchar><newabs>16389944<newchar>Angiogenesis is a promising target for the development of effective strategies for the treatment of malignant brain tumors in that it has the potential to starve large tumors and prevent the regrowth of residual margins. Two critical steps in angiogenesis, the proliferation of activated endothelial cells and their migration into the perivascular space (sprouting), require adherence of the endothelial cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Thus, the availability of the appropriate ligands within the ECM contributes to the regulation of angiogenesis. In addition, several components of the ECM can act through other mechanisms to further promote angiogenesis or inhibit it. Current evidence suggests that the regulation of angiogenesis is a dynamic process in which the endothelial cells can promote angiogenesis by secreting proteases that remodel the ECM, tumor cells can further promote angiogenesis by secreting ECM components and actively remodeling their environment, and stromal cells may respond to angiogenesis associated with tumors and inflammatory reactions by secreting inhibitory molecules. Here, we provide a critical review of the protein and proteoglycan components of the ECM that have been implicated in angiogenesis with an emphasis on their role in promoting or inhibiting angiogenesis in brain tumors.<newchar><newabs>10998429<newchar>Wound repair is initiated with the aggregation of platelets, formation of a fibrin clot, and release of growth factors from the activated coagulation pathways, injured cells, platelets, and extracellular matrix (ECM), followed by migration of inflammatory cells to the wound site. Thereafter, keratinocytes migrate over the wound, angiogenesis is initiated, and fibroblasts deposit and remodel the granulation tissue. Cell migration, angiogenesis, degradation of provisional matrix, and remodeling of newly formed granulation tissue, all require controlled degradation of the ECM. Disturbance in the balance between ECM production and degradation leads to formation of chronic ulcers with excessive ECM degradation, or to fibrosis, for example hypertrophic scars or keloids characterized by excessive accumulation of ECM components. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases, which as a group can degrade essentially all ECM components. So far, 20 members of the human MMP family have been identified. Based on their structure and substrate specificity, they can be divided into subgroups of collagenases, stromelysins, stromelysin-like MMPs, gelatinases, membrane-type MMPs (MT-MMPs), and other MMPs. In this review, the role of MMPs in normal wound repair as well as in chronic ulcers is discussed. In addition, the role of signaling pathways, in particular, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in regulating MMP expression is discussed as possible therapeutical targets for wound healing disorders.<newchar><newabs>15647996<newchar>The present study was performed to test the hypothesis that different bearing materials have an impact on femoral bone remodelling within the first year after a total hip arthroplasty. A total of 225 patients with osteoarthrosis of the hip or avascular necrosis of the femoral head were included in this randomised prospective study. All patients had an identical hybrid total hip arthroplasty (cemented BiMetric stem and cementless RingLoc acetabular cup) except for the bearing materials: polyethylene-on-zirconia (n = 78), CoCr-on-CoCr (n = 71), or alumina-on-alumina (n = 76). Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured with Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) in seven Gruen zones adjacent to the femoral implant. The DEXA scan was performed within one week after surgery and was repeated one year postoperatively. There was no significant difference in periprosthetic BMD change between the three groups. After twelve months the relative BMD decrease was highest in the proximal part of the femur, - 6.2% in the greater trochanter region and - 12.7% in the lesser trochanter region. In the distal zones the relative BMD decrease was -5.3, -4.2, -2.1, -2.3, and -5.6%, respectively. The use of different bearing materials had no significant impact on femoral bone remodelling adjacent to the cemented hip stem within one year after surgery.<newchar><newabs>19563260<newchar>The Galalpha1,3Galbeta1,4GlcNAc-R (Gal) epitope is a major factor in the hyperacute rejection of pig organ transplants in primates. Biologic scaffold materials used for tissue reconstruction and composed of xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) may contain the Gal epitope. However, the effect of this epitope upon the host response is controversial. The present study investigated the effect of the Gal epitope upon the host response to a porcine-derived ECM in an African Green monkey (Cholrocaebus aethiops) abdominal wall resection model. Histologic methods, serology, complement-dependent cytotoxicity, and gene expression profiling were used to evaluate the host response to allogeneic and both wild-type and Gal-deficient xenogeneic scaffold materials. Although expression of the Gal epitope induced an increase in serum anti-Gal antibodies in recipients, no other differences were noted in the host response between test articles. All ECM scaffolds were well tolerated and showed constructive remodeling during the study period. Recipients of all test articles showed no histologic or humoral evidence of sensitization when a second scaffold was implanted 45 days after the original surgery. The findings of the present study show that the presence of the Gal epitope within a porcine-derived ECM scaffold material elicits a serum antibody response, but no adverse effect upon tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16984808<newchar>This chapter will review advances in our understanding of the dynamics of assembly and reorganization of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and will highlight the role of fibronectin as a key orchestrator for the assembly of multiple ECM proteins. The dynamic rather than static nature of the ECM will be emphasized by reviewing time-lapse imaging studies in living cell and embryo systems, with a particular focus on fibronectin and members of the fibrillin superfamily. These studies have provided new insights into the assembly and reorganization of ECM fibrillar networks, suggesting that fibril assembly is a hierarchical process, with increasingly larger fibrillar structures formed by the progressive aggregation of smaller units. These studies have also revealed that motile cells appear to be actively involved in the assembly and reorganization of ECM fibrillar networks by shunting fibrillar material from one location to another, adding fibrillar material to the ends of growing fibrils, and exchanging material between fibrils. A common theme emerging from these studies is that cell- and tissue-generated mechanical forces are critical in the assembly and remodeling of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>16709798<newchar>After Ag capture and exposure to danger stimuli, maturing dendritic cells (DCs) migrate to regional lymph nodes, where antigenic peptides are presented to T lymphocytes. To migrate from peripheral tissue such as the epidermis to regional lymph nodes, Ag-bearing epidermal Langerhans cells must move through an extracellular matrix (ECM) of various compositions. The nature of their capacity to transmigrate via ECM is not well understood, although MIP-3beta and CCR7 play critical roles. We were interested in verifying whether heparanase, a heparan sulfate-degrading endo-beta-d-glucuronidase that participates in ECM degradation and remodeling, is expressed and functional in monocyte-derived DCs. Using immunohistochemistry, confocal microscopy, RT-PCR, Western blot analysis, assays for heparanase activity, and Matrigel transmigration, we show that heparanase is expressed in both nuclei and cytoplasm of immature DCs, and that gene expression and synthesis take place mainly in monocytes and early immature DCs. We also found that both nuclear and cytoplasm fractions show heparanase activity, and upon LPS-induced maturation, heparanase translocates to the cell surface and degrades ECM heparan sulfate. Matrigel transmigration assays showed a MIP-3beta-comparable role for heparanase. Because heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans play a key role in the self-assembly, insolubility, and barrier properties of the ECM, the results of this study suggest that heparanase is a key enzyme in DC transmigration through the ECM.<newchar><newabs>15970383<newchar>The heart consists of cardiocytes and the interstitial extracellular matrix (ECM), which is made up mainly of collagens. The ECM has been suggested to be important in maintaining the structure and function of the heart. This investigation attempted to elucidate the changes in the ECM collagens in the hearts of canines with dirofilariasis. The ECM collagen fibrils of the heart are grouped into endomysial struts, epimysial weaves, and perimysial coils. In the present study, we used the modified silver impregnation technique to stain paraffin-embedded sections to demonstrate three types of ECM. The results revealed that the ECM content of the heart was significantly reduced in heartworm-infected dogs, and became fragmented and dissociated. In addition, the amounts of collagen in the septum (Sep), RVs and LVs in canines with dirofilariasis (Sep=11.55+/-0.65, RV=12.07+/-0.59, LV=11.72+/-0.62 microg/mg, n=24) were significantly lower (p&lt;0.01) than that in the normal canines (Sep=15.09+/-0.72, RV=15.16+/-0.83, LV=14.91+/-0.89 microg/mg, n=8). These results indicated that heartworm infection induced the remodeling of the extracellular matrix, thus markedly altering the architecture and function of the heart.<newchar><newabs>21464841<newchar>The identification of specific target proteins for any diseased condition involves extensive characterization of the potentially involved proteins. Members of a protein family demonstrating comparable features may show certain unusual features when implicated in a pathological condition. Advancements in the field of computational biology and the use of various bioinformatics tools for analysis can aid researchers to comprehend their system of work in primary stages of research. This initial screening can help to reduce time and cost of testing and experimentation in laboratory. Human matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of endopeptidases is one such family of 23 members responsible for the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) by degradation of the ECM proteins. Though their role has been implicated in various pathological conditions such as arthritis, atherosclerosis, cancer, liver fibrosis, cardio-vascular and neurodegenerative disorders, little is known about the specific involvement of members of the large MMP family in diseases. A comparative in silico characterization of the MMP protein family has been carried out to analyze their physico-chemical, secondary structural and functional properties. Based on the observed patterns of occurrence of atypical features, we hypothesize that cysteine rich and highly thermostable MMPs might be key players in diseased conditions. Thus, a plausible grouping of disease responsive MMPs that might be considered as promising clinical targets may be done. This study can be used as a fundamental approach to characterize, analyze and screen large protein families for the identification of signature patterns.<newchar><newabs>17334975<newchar>Development of an optimal interface between bone and orthopaedic and dental implants has taken place for many years. In order to determine whether a newly developed implant material conforms to the requirements of biocompatibility, mechanical stability and safety, it must undergo rigorous testing both in vitro and in vivo. Results from in vitro studies can be difficult to extrapolate to the in vivo situation. For this reason the use of animal models is often an essential step in the testing of orthopaedic and dental implants prior to clinical use in humans. This review discusses some of the more commonly available and frequently used animal models such as the dog, sheep, goat, pig and rabbit models for the evaluation of bone-implant interactions. Factors for consideration when choosing an animal model and implant design are discussed. Various bone specific features are discussed including the usage of the species, bone macrostructure and microstructure and bone composition and remodelling, with emphasis being placed on the similarity between the animal model and the human clinical situation. While the rabbit was the most commonly used of the species discussed in this review, it is clear that this species showed the least similarities to human bone. There were only minor differences in bone composition between the various species and humans. The pig demonstrated a good likeness with human bone however difficulties may be encountered in relation to their size and ease of handling. In this respect the dog and sheep/goat show more promise as animal models for the testing of bone implant materials. While no species fulfils all of the requirements of an ideal model, an understanding of the differences in bone architecture and remodelling between the species is likely to assist in the selection of a suitable species for a defined research question.<newchar><newabs>19040192<newchar>Mechanical loading is one of the key factors that influence bone mass and the osseointegration of bone-anchored implants. From a clinical point of view, mechanical stimulation may be used to enhance bone strength and implant osseointegration. Among the many loading parameters that influence the response to mechanical loading, the effects of loading frequency and rate have been investigated in many studies. In this paper the most relevant animal studies that have addressed the effect of loading frequency, rate, and vibration on either bone adaptation or implant osseointegration are systematically reviewed. Apparently contradictory results are discussed and interpreted within the context of mechanotransduction and mechanoregulation of bone. A combined experimental and computational approach is suggested to address some of the remaining research questions.<newchar><newabs>19355976<newchar>Blood vessels are highly organized and complex structure, which are far more than simple tubes conducting the blood to almost any tissue of the body. They are able to autonomously regulate the blood flow, thus providing the tissues an optimal support of oxygen and nutrients and an efficient removal of waste products. In higher organisms, the blood vessel forms a closed circuit system, which additionally has the ability to seal itself in case of leakage as a result of injury. The blood vessel system does not only transport soluble substances, but also serves as &quot;highway&quot; system for leukocytes to patrol the body during the immunological surveillance and to reach the inflammation site quickly. In a complex interplay with the vascular wall, leukocytes are able to penetrate the blood vessel without any obvious leakage. Pathologically, tumor cells subvert the blood vessel system to disseminate from the primary tumor and colonize distant organs during metastasis. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of a blood vessel contributes substantially to the diverse functions of the blood vessel. First, the ECM constitutes the scaffold which keeps the histological structure of the vessel wall in shape but also bears the enormous and permanent mechanical forces levied on the vessel by the pulsatile blood flow in the arteries and by vasoconstriction, which regulates blood flow and pressure. The complex network of elastic fibers and tensile forces-bearing networks are well adapted to accomplish these mechanical tasks. Second, the ECM provides informational cues to the vascular cells, thus regulating their proliferation and differentiation. Third, ECM molecules can store, mask, present or sequester growth factors, thereby modulating their effects remarkably. Furthermore, several ECM molecules serve additional functions within the blood vessel. Their expression is altered in a spatial and temporal pattern during blood vessel formation and remodeling. In contrast to vasculogenesis during embryonic development, blood vessel shows a remarkably and life-long plasticity, which allows the formation and regeneration of new blood vessel even in adulthood. Both physiologically during wound healing and pathologically during tumor growth, the sprouting of new blood vessels during angiogenesis is an important process, in which the ECM takes a key role.<newchar><newabs>21148111<newchar>Aging impairs function in the nonischemic heart and is associated with mechanical remodeling. This process includes accumulation of collagen (i.e., fibrosis) and dysregulation of active matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Exercise training (ET) improves cardiac function, but the pathways of protection remain poorly understood. Young (3 mo) and old (31 mo) FBNF1 rats were assigned into sedentary and exercise groups, with ET group rats training on a treadmill 45 min/d, 5 d/wk for 12 wk. Nonlinear optical microscopy (NLOM), histology, immunohistochemistry (IHC), and Western blot analyses were performed on the left ventricle and septum. NLOM, IHC, and histological imaging revealed that ET reduced age-associated elevation of collagen type I fibers. Active MMP-1, active MMP-2, and MMP-14 in the ECM fraction of the left ventricle were reduced by aging, an effect abrogated by ET. Tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP-1) was elevated with age but protected by ET. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), upstream regulator of TIMP-1, increased with age but was attenuated by ET. Therefore, exercise training could protect the aging heart against dysregulation of MMPs and fibrosis by suppressing elevation of TIMP-1 and TGF-β.<newchar><newabs>21883991<newchar>Chronic heart failure (CHF) is a growing health problem in developed nations. The pathological accumulation of extracellular matrix is a key contributor to CHF in both diabetic and nondiabetic states, resulting in progressive stiffening of the ventricular walls and loss of contractility. Proinflammatory disease processes, including inflammatory cytokine activation, contribute to accumulation of extracellular matrix in the heart. Transforming growth factor-β is a key profibrotic cytokine mediating fibrosis. Current therapeutic strategies do not directly target the profibrotic inflammatory processes occurring in the heart and hence there is a clear unmet clinical need to develop new therapeutic agents targeting fibrosis. Accordingly, strategies that inhibit proinflammatory cytokine activation and pathological accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) provide a potential therapeutic target for prevention of heart failure. This review focuses on the therapeutic targeting of TGF-β in the prevention of pathological fibrosis in the heart.<newchar><newabs>14528463<newchar>The resistance of two biomaterials, one synthetic and one biologic in origin, to deliberate bacterial infection was compared in a dog model of orthopedic soft tissue reconstruction. Twenty-four adult female dogs were randomly divided into two equal groups and a 2.0-cm-round full-thickness defect was created on the lateral surface of the stifle joint, leaving only the synovium and skin intact. The defect was surgically repaired with either Dacron trade mark mesh or a porcine derived extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold material. The repair site was inoculated with 1 x 10(8) Staphylococcus aureus at the time of surgery and the dogs were survived for 28 days. Results showed a chronic pyogranulomatous inflammatory response at the Dacron trade mark implant sites versus a constructive tissue-remodeling response without residual inflammation at the ECM implant site. Three dogs in the group receiving the Dacron trade mark mesh were treated with Keflex trade mark (500 mg bid x 7 days) for signs of septicemia. A quantitative bacterial count of the implant sites at the time of sacrifice showed 6.52 x 10(5) +/- 1.2 x 10(6) and 6.5 x 10(2) +/- 1.8 x 10(3) bacteria per gram of tissue for the Dacron trade mark and ECM scaffold sites, respectively (P &lt;.03). The ECM implant material was more resistant than the synthetic implant material to persistent infection following deliberate bacterial contamination and the ECM scaffold supported constructive tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>10495107<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a gene family of neutral proteases involved in normal and pathological processes in the central nervous system (CNS). Normally released into the extracellular space, MMPs break down the extracellular matrix (ECM) to allow cell growth and to facilitate remodeling. Proteolysis becomes pathological when the normal balance between the proteases and their inhibitors, tissue inhibitors to metalloproteinases (TIMPs), is lost. Cancer cells secrete neutral proteases to facilitate spread through the ECM. MMPs increase capillary permeability, and they have been implicated in demyelination. Neurological diseases, such as brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barré, ischemia, Alzheimer's disease, and infections, lead to an increase in the matrix-degrading proteases. Two classes of neutral proteases have been extensively studied, namely the MMPs and the plasminogen activators (PAs), which act in concert to attack the ECM. After proteolytic injury occurs, the process of ECM remodeling begins, which can lead to fibrosis of blood vessels and gliosis. TIMPs are increased after the acute injury and may add to the fibrotic buildup of ECM components. Thus, an imbalance in proteolytic activity either during the acute injury or in recovery may aggravate the underlying disease process. Agents that affect the proteolytic process at any of the regulating sites are potentially useful in therapy.<newchar><newabs>15763922<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes with metal ion-dependent activity that degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) glycoproteins. MMPs play a vital role in various biological processes, such as embryogenesis, tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, and wound healing, and in certain disease processes, for example, metastasis of cancer cells. Following their activation, MMPs are believed to modulate both cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, which in turn regulate cellular differentiation, migration, proliferation, and cell survival. Being involved in pericellular proteolysis, they maintain a gradient of ECM proteins by balancing ECM synthesis and degradation. Such a balance is critical for various mammalian developmental processes during embryonic life and also for the homeostasis of various organs and reparative processes in later life. During the past two decades the role of MMPs in the morphogenesis of various organs, including that of the metanephros, has been investigated extensively. Mammalian nephrogenesis comprises a series of intricate events characterized by a sustained remodeling and turnover of ECM, suggesting a potential role of MMPs in renal development. Conceivably, reciprocal inductive epithelial-mesenchymal interactions that take place at the very commencement of nephrogenesis are modulated by a number of ECM proteins. Their expression, especially at the epithelial-mesenchymal interface, are critical for metanephric development, and such a strategic expression is likely to be modified by a number of different macromolecules that exhibit spatiotemporal and stage-specific expression. Among them the most suitable candidate that could exert such a control would be MMPs. This review addresses the current status of our understanding of the functions and the role of MMPs in renal development.<newchar><newabs>18650796<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is a key event in progression and reversal of kidney disease. This process results from synthesis of ECM components and their degradation, mostly by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). However, because of both the multiplicity of their targets that include non-matrix substrates, and the complexity of their regulation, MMPs may exert different, and even opposite, effects during the different phases of the evolution of kidney diseases. The major challenge with future therapeutic interventions will be to accomplish temporal control of MMP activity. In addition to MMPs, enzymes that stabilize ECM (transglutaminase) and cell receptors for ECM components including integrins and discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1), play an important role in the cell response to matrix remodeling. Novel therapeutic approaches aimed at targeting transglutaminase and ECM receptors, particularly DDR1, are a promising option provided that specific and safe pharmacological inhibitors be developed. These therapies together with pharmacological agents controlling MMP activity, given in appropriate windows of the course of kidney diseases may represent a useful adjunct to blockers of the renin-angiotensin system.<newchar><newabs>11713098<newchar>Airway remodeling complicates longstanding asthma. It is characterized by an increase in the number of airway smooth muscle cells (SMCs) as well as an increase in and alteration of the type of extra-cellular matrix (ECM) in the airways. Although the number of SMCs in the airways depends on the balance of cell proliferation and cell death, studies to date have concentrated on factors affecting SMC proliferation. Here we report the first study on airway SMC survival factors: these cells receive a strong survival signal, which is not dependent on the known growth factor mitogens. We identified the ECM factors fibronectin, laminin, and collagens I and IV as important anti-apoptotic elements, and characterized the expression of the ECM receptors (integrins) on cultured SMC. Functionally blocking antibody and peptide studies revealed the alpha(5)beta(1) integrin to be an important transducer of the ECM-derived survival signal in these cells. Confocal microscopy confirmed the striking effects that discrete ECM factors have on SMC phenotype, notably the cytoskeleton. In summary, our data improves the understanding of the mechanisms underlying airway remodeling by outlining the key survival factors for airway SMC and by highlighting the impact of the cell-matrix interactions on cell death and phenotype.<newchar><newabs>17099729<newchar>Transglutaminase 2 (TG2, a.k.a. tissue transglutaminase) belongs to a family of transglutaminase enzymes that stabilize proteins by affecting covalent crosslinking via formation of amide bonds. Cell surface TG2 is directly involved as an adhesive receptor in cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. Here, we show that TG2 activity is elevated in glioblastomas compared with non-neoplastic brain. Immunofluorescent studies showed increased staining of fibronectin colocalized with TG2 in the ECM in glioblastomas. In addition, small clusters of invading human glioblastoma cells present in non-neoplastic brain parenchyma secrete high levels of TG2 and fibronectin that distinguish them from normal brain stroma. Downregulation of TG2 in U87MG glioblastoma cells with RNAi demonstrated decreased assembly of fibronectin in the ECM. Treatment with KCC009 blocked the remodeling of fibronectin in the ECM in glioblastomas in both in vitro and in vivo studies. KCC009 treatment in mice harboring orthotopic glioblastomas (DBT-FG) sensitized the tumors to N,N'-bis(2-chloroethyl)-N-nitrosourea chemotherapy, as measured by reduced bioluminescence, increased apoptosis and prolonged survival. The ability of KCC009 to interfere with the permissive remodeling of fibronectin in the ECM in glioblastomas suggests a novel target to enhance sensitivity to chemotherapy directed not only at the tumor mass, but also invading glioblastoma cells.<newchar><newabs>22135757<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases MMP-9 and MMP-2, major modulators of the extracellular matrix (ECM), were changed in amount and distribution in the rat anteroventral cochlear nucleus (AVCN) following its sensory deafferentation by cochlear ablation. To determine what causal relationships exist between the redistribution of MMP-9 and MMP-2 and deafferentation-induced reinnervation, kainic acid was stereotaxically injected into the ventral nucleus of the trapezoid body (VNTB) prior to cochlear ablation, killing cells that deliver the growth associated protein 43 (GAP-43) into AVCN. Deafferentation-induced changes in the pattern of MMP-9 staining remained unaffected by VNTB lesions. By contrast, changes in the distribution of MMP-2 normally evoked by sensory deafferentation were reversed if GAP-43 positive axons were prevented to grow in AVCN. In conclusion, GAP-43-containing axons emerging in AVCN after cochlear ablation seem to be causal for the maintenance of MMP-2-mediated ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16826793<newchar>Regenerative medicine approaches for the treatment of damaged or missing myocardial tissue include cell-based therapies, scaffold-based therapies, and/or the use of specific growth factors and cytokines. The present study evaluated the ability of extracellular matrix (ECM) derived from porcine urinary bladder to serve as an inductive scaffold for myocardial repair. ECM scaffolds have been shown to support constructive remodeling of other tissue types including the lower urinary tract, the dermis, the esophagus, and dura mater by mechanisms that include the recruitment of bone marrow-derived progenitor cells, angiogenesis, and the generation of bioactive molecules that result from degradation of the ECM. ECM derived from the urinary bladder matrix, identified as UBM, was configured as a single layer sheet and used as a biologic scaffold for a surgically created 2 cm2 full-thickness defect in the right ventricular free wall. Sixteen dogs were divided into two equal groups of eight each. The defect in one group was repaired with a UBM scaffold and the defect in the second group was repaired with a Dacron patch. Each group was divided into two equal subgroups (n = 4), one of which was sacrificed 15 min after surgical repair and the other of which was sacrificed after 8 weeks. Global right ventricular contractility was similar in all four subgroups groups at the time of sacrifice. However, 8 weeks after implantation the UBM-treated defect area showed significantly greater (p &lt; 0.05) regional systolic contraction compared to the myocardial defects repaired with by Dacron (3.3 +/- 1.3% vs. -1.8 +/- 1.1%; respectively). Unlike the Dacron-repaired region, the UBM-repaired region showed an increase in systolic contraction over the 8-week implantation period (-4.2 +/- 1.7% at the time of implantation vs. 3.3 +/- 1.3% at 8 weeks). Histological analysis showed the expected fibrotic reaction surrounding the embedded Dacron material with no evidence for myocardial regeneration. Histologic examination of the UBM scaffold site showed cardiomyocytes accounting for approximately 30% of the remodeled tissue. The cardiomyocytes were arranged in an apparently randomly dispersed pattern throughout the entire tissue specimen and stained positive for alpha- sarcomeric actinin and Connexin 43. The thickness of the UBM graft site increased greatly from the time of implantation to the 8-week sacrifice time point when it was approximately the thickness of the normal right ventricular wall. Histologic examination suggested complete degradation of the originally implanted ECM scaffold and replacement by host tissues. We conclude that UBM facilitates a constructive remodeling of myocardial tissue when used as replacement scaffold for excisional defects.<newchar><newabs>22181043<newchar>High levels of homocysteine (Hcy), known as hyperhomocysteinmia (HHcy), are correlated with an increase in extracellular matrix remodelling (ECM) via the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and plasminogen/plasmin system. This results in an increase deposition of collagen that leads to endothelial-myocyte (EM) and myocyte-myocyte (MM) uncoupling; the physiological consequences are a plethora of cardiovascular pathologies. Homocysteine-induced increase in intracellular and mitochondrial Ca(2+) plays an important role in increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) within mitochondria and instigating mitophagy within the cell. This occurs via several Hcy-mitigated processes: agonizing N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-1 (NMDA-R1), decreasing expression of peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR) [thereby increasing oxidation], impairing Ca(2+) handling via Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX1) and Sarco endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA-2a). The end result is an increase in ROS that directly or indirectly lead to MMP activation within mitochondria or the cytoplasm. Hcy induces a mitochondrial permeability transition that allows MMPs to be released from mitochondria thereby metabolizing matrix and impairing cardiac function. Further work remains to be elucidated concerning the specific mitochondrial mitophagic mechanisms under which matrix metabolism and remodelling occurs. Moreover, the therapeutic implications of NMDA and PPAR ligands are some promise to patient.<newchar><newabs>20543003<newchar>Asthma is characterized by airway remodeling associated with an increase in the deposition of ECM proteins such as type I collagen. These components are mainly produced by fibroblasts. Inhaled corticosteroids are considered the cornerstone of asthma therapy. Despite substantial evidence as to the anti-inflammatory action of corticosteroids, their effect on controlling ECM protein deposition in the airways is not completely understood. This study determined the effect of dexamethasone (Dex) on collagen production by bronchial fibroblasts derived from asthmatic and healthy subjects. Expression of procollagen mRNA in fibroblasts from asthmatics and normal controls was determined by quantitative PCR. Regulation of the procollagen-alpha(1)I promoter was evaluated by transient transfections. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) protein expression was determined by ELISA. Protein expression of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and interaction with activator protein-1 (AP-1), a collagen regulatory transcription factor, was assessed by Western blots, coimmunoprecipitations, and EMSA. AP-1 overexpression was performed by transient transfection using c-Fos/c-Jun expression plasmids. Dex significantly downregulated procollagen production and promoter activity in normal fibroblasts but had no effect on asthmatic fibroblasts. AP-1 and GR interaction increased after Dex stimulation in asthmatic fibroblasts. AP-1 overexpression in control fibroblasts abrogated collagen gene response to Dex. These results show that Dex failed to reduce collagen production in fibroblasts from asthmatic subjects. This impaired response may be related to AP-1 overexpression in these cells.<newchar><newabs>11950054<newchar>Extracellular matrices (ECM) derived from porcine tissues have been shown to support the successful repair and remodeling of injured tissues when evaluated in animal models. Cell-matrix interactions, including ligand-integrin associations that facilitate endothelial cell adhesion, are clearly important in the tissue remodeling process. The goal of the present study was to identify the peptide sequences within the ubiquitous protein fibronectin (FN) that may be important in the initial interactions between the host endothelial cells and the ECM scaffold. Human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC) were seeded upon porcine ECM after having been subjected to pretreatment with peptide ligands derived from tissue FN and were allowed to attach for 20 min. Non-adherent cells were removed and the remaining, tritium-labeled cells attached to the ECM were counted. Results showed that cyclo-RGD and REDV, but not LDV or PHSRN, play a role in mediating the attachment of HMEC to porcine ECM.<newchar><newabs>19514468<newchar>The ECM remodeling is a finely orchestrated process that involves changes in expression of the ECM genes and the activity of proteinases to clear the previous ECM deposit. Among enzymes involved in ECM remodeling, zinc-dependent proteinases--matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are believed to be the ones of major importance. MMPs degrade the ECM components and regulate the bioavailability and/or activity of growth factors by cleavage of both matrix and non-matrix substrates or by mediating receptor turnover. This review introduces the members of the MMP family and discusses their domain structure and function, proenzyme activation and the mechanism of inhibition.<newchar><newabs>16078232<newchar>Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a progressive optic neuropathy, which is a major cause of worldwide visual impairment and blindness. Pathological hallmarks of the glaucomatous optic nerve head (ONH) include retinal ganglion cell axon loss and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling of the lamina cribrosa layer. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is an important pro-fibrotic modulator of ECM metabolism, whose levels are elevated in human POAG lamina cribrosa tissue compared with non-glaucomatous controls. We hypothesize that in POAG, lamina cribrosa (LC) glial cells respond to elevated TGF-beta, producing a remodeled ONH ECM. Using Affymetrix microarrays, we report the first study examining the effect of TGF-beta1 on global gene expression profiles in glial fibrillary acidic acid (GFAP)-negative LC glial cells in vitro. Prominent among the differentially expressed genes were those with established fibrogenic potential, including CTGF, collagen I, elastin, thrombospondin, decorin, biglycan, and fibromodulin. Independent TaqMan and Sybr Green quantitative PCR analysis significantly validated genes involved in regulation of cell proliferation (platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF-alpha]), angiogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF]), ECM accumulation and degradation (CTGF, IL-11, and ADAMT-S5), and growth factor binding (ESM-1). Bioinformatic analysis of the ESM-1 promoter identified putative Smad and Runx transcription factor binding sites, and luciferase assays confirmed that TGF-beta1 drives transcription of the ESM-1 gene. TGF-beta1 induces expression and release of ECM components in LC cells, which may be important in regulating matrix remodeling in the lamina cribrosa. In disease states such as POAG, the LC cell may represent an important pro-fibrotic cell type and an attractive target for novel therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>20683851<newchar>Gingival cells of the oral connective tissue are exposed to complex mechanical forces during mastication, speech, tooth movement and orthodontic treatments. Especially during wound healing following surgical procedures, internal and external forces may occur, creating pressure upon the newly formed tissue. This clinical situation has to be considered when developing biomaterials to augment soft tissue in the oral cavity. In order to pre-evaluate a collagen sponge intended to serve as a substitute for autogenous connective tissue grafts (CTGs), a dynamic bioreactor system was developed. Pressure and shear forces can be applied in this bioreactor in addition to a constant medium perfusion to cell-material constructs. Three-dimensional volume changes and stiffness of the matrices were analyzed. In addition, cell responses such as cell vitality and extracellular matrix (ECM) production were investigated. The number of metabolic active cells constantly increased under fully dynamic culture conditions. The sponges remained elastic even after mechanical forces were applied for 14 days. Analysis of collagen type I and fibronectin revealed a statistically significant accumulation of these ECM molecules (P &lt; 0.05-0.001) when compared to static cultures. An increased expression of tenascin-c, indicating tissue remodeling processes, was observed under dynamic conditions only. The results indicate that the tested in vitro cell culture system was able to mimic both the biological and mechanical environments of the clinical situation in a healing wound.<newchar><newabs>21104785<newchar>The heparin-degrading endosulfatases sulfatase 1 (SULF1) and sulfatase 2 (SULF2) have opposing effects in hepatocarcinogenesis despite structural similarity. Using mRNA expression arrays, we analyzed the correlations of SULF expression with signaling networks in human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and the associations of SULF expression with tumor phenotype and patient survival. Data from two mRNA microarray analyses of 139 and 36 HCCs and adjacent tissues were used as training and validation sets. Partek and Metacore software were used to identify SULF correlated genes and their associated signaling pathways. Associations between SULF expression, the hepatoblast subtype of HCC, and survival were examined. Both SULF1 and 2 had strong positive correlations with periostin, IQGAP1, TGFB1, and vimentin and inverse correlations with HNF4A and IQGAP2. Genes correlated with both SULFs were highly associated with the cell adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, blood coagulation, TGFB, and Wnt/β-catenin and epithelial mesenchymal transition signaling pathways. Genes uniquely correlated with SULF2 were more associated with neoplastic processes than genes uniquely correlated with SULF1. High SULF expression was associated with the hepatoblast subtype of HCC. There was a bimodal effect of SULF1 expression on prognosis, with patients in the lowest or highest tertile having a worse prognosis than those in the middle tertile. SULFs have complex effects on HCC signaling and patient survival. There are functionally similar associations with cell adhesion, ECM remodeling, TGFB, and WNT pathways, but also unique associations of SULF1 and SULF2. The roles and targeting of the SULFs in cancer require further investigation.<newchar><newabs>21389674<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a major role in the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of skeletal muscle, and the inducible gelatinase MMP-9 in particular appears to be critical for the remodeling of muscle ECM during growth and repair. Here we determined the effects of MMP-9 gene inactivation on fiber type and size in the tibialis anterior (TA), gastrocnemius (GAST), and soleus (SOL) muscles in female mice. In the TA, the cross-sectional area (CSA) of the myosin heavy chain (MyHC) IIb-expressing fibers was significantly smaller in MMP-9 null mice while in the GAST, CSA of all three fast fiber types was decreased. In the SOL, MyHC type I-expressing fibers were significantly smaller in the MMP-9 null mice. The percentage of MyHC type IIb-expressing fibers was significantly increased in the TA and GAST of MMP-9 null mice, while the percentage of MyHC IId-expressing fibers significantly decreased in the GAST of MMP-9 null mice. Fiber percentages in the SOL were not significantly different between the two lines. Despite these changes in fiber size and type, in vivo hindlimb force production was not changed in MMP-9 null mice. Meanwhile, neither expression of the constitutive gelatinase MMP-2 nor immunohistochemical staining for type IV collagen was significantly altered by MMP-9 inactivation in any muscles examined. The present study demonstrates that MMP-9 inactivation results in changes in fiber size and type in adult mouse hindlimb muscles that may depend on indirect mechanisms involving reduced bone growth or nerve changes in response to MMP-9 inactivation.<newchar><newabs>21453692<newchar>Aristolochic acid (AA)-associated nephropathy was described as being characterized by a rapid progressive enhancement of interstitial renal fibrosis. Renal tissue fibrosis occurs because of an imbalance of extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation. Much evidence indicates that inflammatory renal disease including monocyte and mesangial interactions is linked to the development and progression of renal remodeling. In this study, we found that AA showed concentration-dependent inhibition of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α-induced MMP-9 activation with an IC(50) value of 6.4±0.5μM in human monocytic THP-1 cells. A similar effect was also noted with different ratios of AAs (types I and II). However, AA had no inhibitory effect on the intact enzymatic activity of MMP-9 at a concentration of 20μM. On the other hand, the level of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 was not induced by AA, but it suppressed TNF-α-induced MMP-9 protein and messenger RNA expressions. AA also significantly inhibited TNF-α-induced IκBα degradation. Furthermore, an electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a reported gene study, respectively, revealed that AA inhibited TNF-α-induced NF-κB translocation and activation. In addition, compared to other NF-κB inhibitors, AA exerted significant inhibition of MMP-9 activation and monocyte chemotactic protein-1-directed invasion. From these results, we concluded that AA, a natural compound, inhibits TNF-α-induced MMP-9 in human monocytic cells possibly through the NF-κB signal pathway. These results also imply that AA may be involved in alteration of matrix homeostasis during renal fibrosis in vivo.<newchar><newabs>21136250<newchar>The basic principles influencing scar expression and outcome have long been defined. Although these were relatively clear at the time, the exact events at a molecular level were poorly defined. The past decade has delineated the myriad of events that occur in the run-up to scar evolution far more clearly, although the intricate details have yet to be elucidated. What is clear is that a series of conversations and crosstalk takes place in the cell cytosol, in the cellular nucleus, and outside the cell within in the extracellular matrix. This interaction or &quot;dynamic reciprocity&quot; takes place via a series of signals, protein activation, ionic translocations, and receptor transactions. Marrying the previously defined principles with current described cellular/extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions enables us to describe more accurately the crosstalk occurring in scar evolution and possibly to influence the &quot;wording&quot; of that crosstalk to improve scar outcome. Thus, the principles of mechanostimulation and scar support, hydration occlusion, controlled inflammation, and collagen/extracellular remodeling are discussed with possible interventions in each category.<newchar><newabs>20470890<newchar>Cells adhere to one another and/or to matrices that surround them. Regulation of cell-cell (intercellular) and cell-matrix adhesion is tightly controlled in normal cells, however, defects in cell adhesion are common in the majority of human cancers. Multilateral communication among tumor cells with the extracellular matrix (ECM) and neighbor cells is accomplished through adhesion molecules, ECM components, proteolytic enzymes and their endogenous inhibitors. There is sufficient evidence to suggest that reduced adherence is a tumor cell property engaged during tumor progression. Tumor cells acquire the ability to change shape, detach and easily move through spaces disorganizing the normal tissue architecture. This property is due to changes in expression levels of adhesion molecules and/or due to elevated levels of secreted proteolytic enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Among other roles, MMPs degrade the ECM and, therefore, prepare the path for tumor cells to migrate, invade and spread to distant secondary areas, where they form metastasis. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases or TIMPs control MMP activities and, therefore, minimize matrix degradation. Both MMPs and TIMPs are involved in tissue remodeling and decisively regulate tumor cell progression including tumor angiogenesis. In this review, we describe and discuss data that support the important role of MMPs and TIMPs in cancer cell adhesion and tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>20335177<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules play important roles in many biological and pathological processes. During tissue remodeling, the ECM molecules that are glycosylated are different from those of normal tissue owing to changes in the expression of many proteins that are responsible for glycan synthesis. Vitronectin (VN) is a major ECM molecule that recognizes integrin on hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). The present study attempted to elucidate how changes in VN glycans modulate the survival of HSCs, which play a critical role in liver regeneration. Plasma VN was purified from partially hepatectomized (PH) and sham-operated (SH) rats at 24 h after operation and non-operated (NO) rats. Adhesion of rat HSCs (rHSCs), together with phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase, in PH-VN was decreased to one-half of that in NO- or SH-VN. Spreading of rHSCs on desialylated NO-VN was decreased to one-half of that of control VN, indicating the importance of sialylation of VN for activation of HSCs. Liquid chromatography/multiple-stage mass spectrometry analysis of Glu-C glycopeptides of each VN determined the site-specific glycosylation. In addition to the major biantennary complex-type N-glycans, hybrid-type N-glycans were site-specifically present at Asn(167). Highly sialylated O-glycans were found to be present in the Thr(110)-Thr(124) region. In PH-VN, the disialyl O-glycans and complex-type N-glycans were decreased while core-fucosylated N-glycans were increased. In addition, immunodetection after two-dimensional PAGE indicated the presence of hyper- and hyposialylated molecules in each VN and showed that hypersialylation was markedly attenuated in PH-VN. This study proposes that the alteration of VN glycosylation modulates the substrate adhesion to rat HSCs, which is responsible for matrix restructuring.<newchar><newabs>14510237<newchar>Remodeling of large and small arteries contributes to the development and complications of hypertension. Artery structural changes in chronic sustained hypertension include vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) modifications. Extracellular constituents such as proteoglycans (PGs), may modulate vascular stiffness and VSMC growth and differentiation. We examined the effect of growth factors on secreted and membrane-bound PGs synthesis by cultured aortic smooth muscle cells (SMC) from 12- to 14- week-old spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and age-matched Wistar rats. After stimulation with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-BB), 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) or 0.1% FCS as control, PGs synthesis (dpm/ng DNA) was evaluated in the medium (M-ECM) and in the cell layer (P-ECM) by a double-isotopic label method using both [3H]-glucosamine and [35S]-sodium sulfate which are incorporated into all complex carbohydrates or only into sulfated dysaccharides, respectively. Data are presented as percent of the control (0.1% FCS). SHR VSMC displayed a significantly greater synthesis of M-ECM [3H]-PGs than Wistar rat cells, with both treatments, but no differences in M-ECM [35S] uptake were found in any case. In the P-ECM, both PDGF-BB and 10% FCS produced a greater effect on [3H]-PGs and sulfated PGs synthesis in VSMC from SHR. An important change seen in SHR cells was a significant decreased sulfation, assessed by [35S]/[3H] ratio, in basal and stimulation conditions. Present results indicate the existence of changes in PGS synthesis and modulation in VSMC from a conduit-artery of SHR and support the pathophysiological role proposed for matrix proteoglycans in the vascular wall changes associated to hypertension and related vascular diseases as atherosclerosis.<newchar><newabs>10601729<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) is the substrate for cell adhesion, growth, and differentiation, and it provides mechanical support to tissues. It is well known that connective tissue cells adapt their ECM to changes in mechanical load, as seen, e.g. during bone remodeling or wound healing. A feedback mechanism must exist by which cells that sense mechanical stress via their substrate respond by an altered pattern of protein expression, and thus remodel the ECM to meet changing mechanical requirements. What signals are triggered in connective tissue cells by mechanical stress, and how do such stimuli affect the expression of specific ECM proteins? The evidence will be reviewed that integrins, the transmembrane adhesion and signaling receptors which physically link ECM to the cytoskeleton, might be key players in transducing mechanical signals, presumably via MAP kinase and NF-kappaB pathways. At the far end of the response, there is evidence for regulation at the level of gene transcription. For example, the production of tenascin-C and collagen XII, two ECM proteins typical of tendons and ligaments, is high in fibroblasts attached to a stretched collagen matrix, but suppressed in cells on a relaxed matrix. The response to a change in stretch is rapid and reversible, and is reflected on the mRNA level. Both the tenascin-C and the collagen XII gene promoters contain 'stretch-responsive' enhancer regions with similarity to 'shear stress response elements' in other genes. The precise signal pathways converging on these mechano-responsive enhancer elements remain to be elucidated.<newchar><newabs>12324220<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of a complex mixture of structural and functional proteins and serves an important role in tissue and organ morphogenesis, maintenance of cell and tissue structure and function, and in the host response to injury. Xenogeneic and allogeneic ECM has been used as a bioscaffold for the reconstruction of many different tissue types in both pre-clinical and human clinical studies. Common features of ECM-associated tissue remodeling include extensive angiogenesis, recruitment of circulating progenitor cells, rapid scaffold degradation and constructive remodeling of damaged or missing tissues. The ECM-induced remodeling response is a distinctly different phenomenon from that of scar tissue formation.<newchar><newabs>21564420<newchar>The tumor stroma is a source of many potential new tumor biomarkers, in which the immune response is of major importance. Little is known regarding how changes in stromal gene expression affect hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression. We analyzed the expression of 28 stroma-related genes using quantitative RT-PCR in 122 HCC samples, and related the results to patient prognosis. Hierarchical clustering based on expression of the 28 genes, or the 6-Th1 cell markers, can classify HCC patients into prognostically different subgroups. We further identified a five-gene classifier (protective genes IRF1 and GZMB and risk genes CRTH2, VEGF, and MMP7) as a significant independent prognosticator for recurrence (hazard ratio [HR], 4.80; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.31-9.96; P = 2.6 × 10(-5) ) by multivariate analyses. Importantly, the classifier was further validated in an independent set of 172 HCC samples (HR, 2.21; 95% CI, 1.20-3.00; P = 0.002). The predictive ability of the classifier, as measured by area under the curve (0.713 and 0.613 for original and validation cohorts, respectively), was comparable to those of vascular invasion, Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer stage, and TNM stage. The densities of various tumor stromal cells were analyzed by immunostaining. Comparing the immunostaining and gene expression data showed significant association of the gene classifier with the amount of reactive stroma in both cohorts. Thus, the signature reveals the strong prognostic capacity of immune responses, angiogenic activity, and ECM remodeling, highlighting the importance of stromal biology in HCC progression. Contained in this novel predictor may be targets suitable for new therapeutic interventions, or for use as independent prognosticators.<newchar><newabs>11409848<newchar>An extracellular matrix (ECM) derived from the submucosa of the porcine small intestine (SIS) has been shown to induce angiogenesis and host tissue remodeling when used as a xenogeneic bioscaffold in animal models of wound repair. In the present study, we compared the in vitro effects of SIS ECM extracts to several purified angiogenic growth factors on human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC) growth patterns. The SIS ECM was shown to induce tube formation from HMEC in a three-dimensional fibrin-based angiogenesis assay in a manner similar to that caused by the addition of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). This tube formation was blocked in the presence of anti-VEGF neutralizing antibody. Western blots and ELISA procedures showed that the SIS ECM contains as much as 0.77 ng VEGF/g SIS. The closely related endothelial cell mitogen, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), was not detectable in the SIS extracts. We conclude that VEGF is present in the SIS extracellular matrix. The role of VEGF in SIS-induced wound repair remains unknown, but its presence in the ECM makes it a possible contributor to the angiogenic effect of SIS when this ECM is used as a tissue repair scaffold in animal models of wound repair.<newchar><newabs>19877943<newchar>Small intestinal submucosa (SIS) is a resorbable biomaterial that induces tissue remodeling when used as a xenogeneic tissue graft in animal models of vascular, urologic, dermatologic, neurologic, and orthopedic injury. Determination of the composition and structure of naturally occurring biomaterials such as SIS that promote tissue remodeling is necessary for the greater understanding of their role in wound healing. Since glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are important components of extracellular matrix (ECM) and SIS is primarily an ECM-based material, studies were performed to identify the species of glycosaminoglycans present in SIS. Porcine SIS was chemically extracted and the extracts were analyzed for uronic acid. The extractable uronic acid content was determined to be 47.7 micromol/g (approximately 21 microg GAG/mg) of the dry weight of the SIS tissue. Using electrophoretic separation of GAGs on cellulose acetate membranes, hyaluronic acid, heparin, heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate A, and dermatan sulfate were identified. Digestion of specific GAGs with selective enzymes confirmed the presence of these GAG species. Two GAGs common to other tissues with large basement membrane ECM components, keratan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate C, were not detected in the SIS extracts. Identification of specific GAGs in the composition of the ECM-rich SIS provides a starting point toward a more comprehensive understanding of the structure and function of this naturally occurring biomaterial with favorable in vivo tissue remodeling properties.<newchar><newabs>18988918<newchar>Airway remodeling is observed in the airways of patients with asthma, and differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts plays a critical role in the progress of airway remodeling. Viral infection induces not only the disease development and exacerbations but also airway remodeling. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether the activation of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) can affect the differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts and the extracellular matrix (ECM) protein production. Human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) and adult lung fibroblasts were treated with a synthetic double-stranded RNA, polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) and the expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), a marker of myofibroblast differentiation, was evaluated. The release of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) and ECM protein production were assessed. The effect of anti-TGF-beta antibody on the alpha-SMA and ECM production was also assessed. Poly(I:C) significantly augmented the alpha-SMA expression (P &lt; 0.01) and release of TGF-beta(1) (P &lt; 0.01) compared with control. Bafilomycin, an inhibitor of TLR3 signaling, diminished poly(I:C)-augmented TGF-beta(1) release. Anti-TGF-beta(1) antibody inhibited the poly(I:C)-augmented alpha-SMA expression. Poly(I:C) enhanced translocation of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kappaB) and interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) into the nucleus. Poly(I:C)-augmented TGF-beta(1) release was almost completely blocked by NF-kappaB inhibitors, but not by silencing IRF-3. The production of fibronectin and collagen I expression were significantly increased by poly(I:C) (P &lt; 0.01) and they were inhibited by anti-TGF-beta antibody. These results suggest that activation of TLR3 can affect the differentiation to myofibroblasts and enhance ECM production via the NF-kappaB-TGF-beta(1)-dependent pathway.<newchar><newabs>12584571<newchar>The remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important process required for cancer cells to turn into invasive and metastatic cancer cells. To dissolve the protein components of ECM, matrix metalloproteinases are some of the essential enzymes. Another ECM remodeling enzyme is the heparanase (Hpa) that digests the heparin sulfate component of the matrix. In metastatic cancer cells the Hpa gene is upregulated. To investigate the mechanism of why Hpa was upregulated in metastatic cancer cells, the regulatory sequence of heparanase gene was isolated and its function analysed in metastatic breast cancer cells. We found there are four ETS transcription factor binding sites. Two of them flanking the transcription initiation of the Hpa gene are nonfunctional, whereas two others are highly functional and responded to exogenously added ETS transcription factors. Mutation of these two ETS binding sites abolished the transcriptional activation of Hpa promoter by ETS transcription factors. Among four transcription factors tested (ETS1, ETS2, PEA3, and ER81), ETS1 and ETS2 are more potent in transactivating the human Hpa gene. Furthermore, dominant-negative ETS transcription factors failed to transactivate Hpa promoter and could abrogate the function of wild-type transcription factor in transactivation activity of ETS transcription factors on the Hpa promoter. These results suggest that ETS transcription factors play an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis by modulating the remodeling of ECM.<newchar><newabs>20692703<newchar>With the increasing necessity for functional tissue- and organ equivalents in the clinic, the optimization of techniques for the in vitro generation of organotypic structures that closely resemble the native tissue is of paramount importance. The engineering of a variety of highly differentiated tissues has been achieved using the rotating wall vessel (RWV) bioreactor technology, which is an optimized suspension culture allowing cells to grow in three-dimensions (3-D). However, certain cell types require the use of scaffolds, such as collagen-coated microcarrier beads, for optimal growth and differentiation in the RWV. Removal of the 3-D structures from the microcarriers involves enzymatic treatment, which disrupts the delicate 3-D architecture and makes it inapplicable for potential implantation. Therefore, we designed a microcarrier bead coated with a synthetic extracellular matrix (ECM) composed of a disulfide-crosslinked hyaluronan and gelatin hydrogel for 3-D tissue engineering, that allows for enzyme-free cell detachment under mild reductive conditions (i.e. by a thiol-disulfide exchange reaction). The ECM-coated beads (ECB) served as scaffold to culture human intestinal epithelial cells (Int-407) in the RWV, which formed viable multi-layered cell aggregates and expressed epithelial differentiation markers. The cell aggregates remained viable following dissociation from the microcarriers, and could be returned to the RWV bioreactor for further culturing into bead-free tissue assemblies. The developed ECBs thus offer the potential to generate scaffold-free 3-D tissue assemblies, which could further be explored for tissue replacement and remodeling.<newchar><newabs>21484189<newchar>There are no approved drugs for treating the fibrosis in scleroderma (systemic sclerosis, SSc). Myfibroblasts within connective tissue express the highly contractile protein α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and are responsible for the excessive synthesis and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) characterizing SSc. Drugs targeting myofibroblast differentiation, recruitment and activity are currently under consideration as anti-fibrotic treatments in SSc but thus far have principally focused on the transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), endothelin-1 (ET-1), connective tissue growth factor (CCN2/CTGF) and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) pathways, which display substantial signaling crosstalk. Moreover, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)γ also appears to act by intervening in TGFβ signaling. This review discusses these potential candidates for antifibrotic therapy in SSc.<newchar><newabs>11404367<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) form a family of enzymes with major actions in the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Gelatinase B (MMP-9) is the most complex family member in terms of domain structure and regulation of its activity. Gelatinase B activity is under strict control at various levels: transcription of the gene by cytokines and cellular interactions; activation of the pro-enzyme by a cascade of enzymes comprising serine proteases and other MMPs; and regulation by specific tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs) or by unspecific inhibitors, such as alpha2-macroglobulin. Thus, remodeling ECM is the result of the local protease load, i.e., the net balance between enzymes and inhibitors. Glycosylation has a limited effect on the net activity of gelatinase B, and in contrast to the all-or-none effect of enzyme activation or inhibition, it results in a higher-level, fine-tuning effect on the ECM catalysis by proteases in mammalian species. Fast degranulation of considerable amounts of intracellularly stored gelatinase B from neutrophils, induced by various types of chemotactic factors, is another level of control of activity. Neutrophils are first-line defense leukocytes and do not produce gelatinase A or TIMP. Thus, neutrophils contrast sharply with mononuclear leukocytes, which produce gelatinase A constitutively, synthesize gelatinase B de novo after adequate triggering, and overproduce TIMP-1. Gelatinase B is also endowed with functions other than cleaving the ECM. It has been shown to generate autoimmune neo-epitopes and to activate pro-IL-1beta into active IL-1beta. Gelatinase B ablation in the mouse leads to altered bone remodeling and subfertility, results in resistance to several induced inflammatory or autoimmune pathologies, and indicates that the enzyme plays a crucial role in development and angiogenesis. The major human neutrophil chemoattractant, IL-8, stimulates fast degranulation of gelatinase B from neutrophils. Gelatinase B is also found to function as a regulator of neutrophil biology and to truncate IL-8 at the amino terminus into a tenfold more potent chemokine, resulting in an important positive feedback loop for neutrophil activation and chemotaxis. The CXC chemokines GRO-alpha, CTAP-III, and PF-4 are degraded by gelatinase B, whereas the CC chemokines MCP-2 and RANTES are not cleaved.<newchar><newabs>21382669<newchar>Following an acute injury, the liver may maintain its structure and function through mitotic division of mature hepatocytes (i.e. hepatic regeneration). However, the regeneration ability of hepatocytes can be impaired in chronic liver diseases including chronic viral infection and alcohol abuse. Hepatic progenitor cells/oval cells (HPCs/OCs), capable of differentiation into both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes, occur and proliferate during chronic injury. Unfortunately, a use of HPCs for clinical therapy is blocked by the difficulty of exact identity of HPCs in liver. Focusing on the links between phenotype of HPCs and real stem cells originating from fetal liver or bone marrow (BM), the recent studies of HPCs neglect functional analysis and the close relationship between activation of HPCs and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. It is currently widely accepted that mesenchymal-epithelial transition (EMT) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (MET) play important roles not only in liver development but also in healing of chronic injured adult liver. Co-expression of epithelial/mesenchymal and HPCs markers has been demonstrated in cells undergoing EMT/MET. These cells led to hepatic regeneration after transplanted into rats with chronic liver injury. Notably, there is an increased expression of mesenchymal markers in HPCs after exposure to transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-β1). Based on these evidences, we hypothesize that HPCs represent a transitioning cell population undergoing EMT/MET, both parenchymal and mesenchymal cells of liver may be the direct sources of HPCs.<newchar><newabs>20388014<newchar>Tendon remodeling relies on extracellular matrix (ECM) restructuring by the matrix metallopeptidases (MMPs). The aim of this study was to investigate MMP-2 activity in different regions of the calcaneal tendon (CT) after resistance training (RT) in ovariectomized rats. Wistar adult female rats were grouped into sedentary (Sed-Intact), ovariectomized sedentary (Sed-Ovx), acute exercise (AcuteEx-Intact), ovariectomized acute exercise (AcuteEx-Ovx), resistance trained (ChronicEx-Intact), and ovariectomized resistance trained (ChronicEx-Ovx) (n = 10 each group). The RT protocol required the animals to climb a 1.1-m vertical ladder with weights attached to their tail. The sessions were performed once every 3 days with 4-9 climbs and 8-12 dynamic movements per scaling. The acute groups performed one session and the chronic groups underwent 12 weeks of RT. There was an increase in total MMP-2 activity in Sed-Ovx, AcuteEx-Intact, and ChronicEx-Intact compared with that in Sed-Intact in the proximal region of CT. AcuteEx-Ovx exhibited higher total MMP-2 than Sed-Ovx and AcuteEx-Intact in the distal region of CT. Chronic-Ovx presented lower total MMP-2 activity than Sed-Ovx and Chronic-Intact in the distal region of tendon. The active MMP-2 was higher for the AcuteEx-Ovx than Sed-Ovx and AcuteEx-Intact in proximal region of tendon. There was higher active MMP-2 in the distal region of tendon in the Acute-Ovx than in the Sed-Ovx and AcuteEx-Intact. Ovariectomy and resistance exercise modulate MMP-2 activity according to specific tendon region, indicating a differentiated tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>18814043<newchar>Tumor progression ensues within a three-dimensional microenvironment that consists of cellular and non-cellular components. The extracellular matrix (ECM) and hypoxia are two non-cellular components that potently influence metastasis. ECM remodeling and collagen cross-linking stiffen the tissue stroma to promote transformation, tumor growth, motility and invasion, enhance cancer cell survival, enable metastatic dissemination, and facilitate the establishment of tumor cells at distant sites. Matrix degradation can additionally promote malignant progression and metastasis. Tumor hypoxia is functionally linked to altered stromal-epithelial interactions. Hypoxia additionally induces the expression of pro-migratory, survival and invasion genes, and up-regulates expression of ECM components and modifying enzymes, to enhance tumor progression and metastasis. Synergistic interactions between matrix remodeling and tumor hypoxia influence common mechanisms that maximize tumor progression and cooperate to drive metastasis. Thus, clarifying the molecular pathways by which ECM remodeling and tumor hypoxia intersect to promote tumor progression should identify novel therapeutic targets.<newchar><newabs>20008277<newchar>Advanced age, independent of concurrent cardiovascular disease, can be associated with increased extracellular matrix (ECM) fibrillar collagen content and abnormal diastolic function. However, the mechanisms causing this left ventricular (LV) remodeling remain incompletely defined. We hypothesized that one determinant of age-dependent remodeling is a change in the extent to which newly synthesized procollagen is processed into mature collagen fibrils. We further hypothesized that secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) plays a key role in the changes in post-synthetic procollagen processing that occur in the aged myocardium. Young (3 mo old) and old (18-24 mo old) wild-type (WT) and SPARC-null mice were studied. LV collagen content was measured histologically by collagen volume fraction, collagen composition was measured by hydroxyproline assay as soluble collagen (1 M NaCl extractable) versus insoluble collagen (mature cross-linked), and collagen morphological structure was examined by scanning electron microscopy. SPARC expression was measured by immunoblot analysis. LV and myocardial structure and function were assessed using echocardiographic and papillary muscle experiments. In WT mice, advanced age increased SPARC expression, myocardial diastolic stiffness, fibrillar collagen content, and insoluble collagen. In SPARC-null mice, advanced age also increased myocardial diastolic stiffness, fibrillar collagen content, and insoluble collagen but significantly less than those seen in WT old mice. As a result, insoluble collagen and myocardial diastolic stiffness were lower in old SPARC-null mice (1.36 +/- 0.08 mg hydroxyproline/g dry wt and 0.04 +/- 0.005) than in old WT mice (1.70 +/- 0.10 mg hydroxyproline/g dry wt and 0.07 +/- 0.005, P &lt; 0.05). In conclusion, the absence of SPARC reduced age-dependent alterations in ECM fibrillar collagen and diastolic function. These data support the hypothesis that SPARC plays a key role in post-synthetic procollagen processing and contributes to the increase in collagen content found in the aged myocardium.<newchar><newabs>19718660<newchar>The interaction of cancer cells with extracellular matrix (ECM) is important in metastasization. Here we identified the molecules of the ECM expressed by sarcomatous malignant mesothelioma, and their effect on adhesion and spreading. In addition, by analyzing the relationship between translation and attachment to matrix, we found that mesothelioma cells rely on continuing translation to efficiently attach to matrix, and rapamycin inhibition affects spreading and migration of cancer cells. Specifically, we found that sarcomatous cells produce high amounts of fibronectin, able to support the spreading of mesothelioma cells. Spreading of cancer cells on fibronectin does not require de novo transcription but is sensitive to cycloheximide, an inhibitor of protein synthesis. Next, we analyzed the involvement of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, a major pathway controlling translation. Cancer cells have a constitutively active mTOR pathway; surprisingly, inhibition of mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) by rapamycin barely affects the global rate of translation and of initiation of translation, but deeply inhibits mesothelioma spreading on ECM. The effects of rapamycin and cycloheximide on spreading were observed in several mesothelioma cell lines, although with different magnitude. Overall, data suggest that adhesion and spreading of mesothelioma cells on ECM require the translation of pre-synthesized mRNAs, and mTORC1 activity. We speculate that mTORC1 activity is required either for the translation of specific mRNAs or for the direct modulation of cytoskeletal remodeling.<newchar><newabs>12650974<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling after neuronal injury and reactive gliosis is carried out by activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) regulated by their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs). In glaucoma, there is a loss of retinal ganglion cells and extensive ECM remodeling (cupping) at the level of the optic nerve head, frequently associated with elevated intraocular pressure. To determine whether ECM remodeling in the glaucomatous optic nerve head occurs in response to loss of axons or to elevated intraocular pressure we compared the patterns of MMP and TIMP expression in the eyes of monkeys with laser-induced glaucoma or with optic nerve transection. MT1-MMP and MMP1 expression was markedly increased in reactive astrocytes in optic nerve heads with experimental glaucoma but not in the optic nerve head of transected eyes. In normal control eyes retinal ganglion cells expressed MMP2, TIMP1 and TIMP2 constitutively, and the proteins were detected in their axons. At the site of transection, MT1-MMP, MMP1, MMP2, TIMP1 and TIMP2 were expressed by reactive astrocytes. Inflammatory cells, fibroblasts and reactive astrocytes at the transected site expressed MMP3 and MMP9, which were undetectable in the retina and optic nerve head in any condition. Constitutive expression of MMP2, TIMP1 and TIMP2 in retinal ganglion cells suggests a role in maintenance of synaptic integrity and plasticity and maintenance of the periaxonal space. Increased MMP1 and MT1-MMP1 expression in the glaucomatous optic nerve head is specific to tissue remodeling due to elevated intraocular pressure and not secondary to loss of axons.<newchar><newabs>12695504<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) fragments or cryptic sites unmasked by proteinases have been postulated to affect tissue remodeling and cancer progression. Therefore, the elucidation of their identities and functions is of great interest. Here, we show that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) generate a domain (DIII) from the ECM macromolecule laminin-5. Binding of a recombinant DIII fragment to epidermal growth factor receptor stimulates downstream signaling (mitogen-activated protein kinase), MMP-2 gene expression, and cell migration. Appearance of this cryptic ECM ligand in remodeling mammary gland coincides with MMP-mediated involution in wild-type mice, but not in tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3 (TIMP-3)-deficient mice, supporting physiological regulation of DIII liberation. These findings indicate that ECM cues may operate via direct stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinases in tissue remodeling, and possibly cancer invasion.<newchar><newabs>16438481<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the heart dynamically interacts with various cellular components of the myocardium, including the myocytes and connective tissue cells. With the development and progression of heart failure, left ventricular (LV) myocardial remodeling occurs. The progression of LV remodeling is accompanied by alterations in the structure and function of the ECM that occur after injury resulting from neurohormonal activation, changes in LV loading conditions, and alterations in myocardial perfusion and metabolism and is secondary to a host of nonmyocyte signaling pathways that affect repair and remodeling of the myocardium as a whole. This article attempts to review some of these processes and their interactions and to provide a focus to the often overlooked contribution of the ECM to the development and progression of heart failure and thereby its potential role as a target for therapy for heart failure.<newchar><newabs>20535576<newchar>Apoptosis is a critical physiological pathway required for the normal functioning, homeostasis, and development of many organisms. This process is highly regulated at the biochemical level and has been intensively studied. Recent evidence has demonstrated that apoptosis is also a controlled nanomechanical process which relies on feedback between biochemical signaling and the nanomechanical properties of the microenvironment. Deregulation of the nanomechanical breakdown of apoptotic cells results in the poorly timed release of cells and cell debris that leads to the pathogenesis of several inflammatory diseases. In this study, we investigate the nanomechanical consequences of early apoptosis in human fibroblasts grown as single cells and as cell monolayers. These fibroblasts are found within the body and are involved in many processes including wound healing and repair in which apoptosis plays a major role. We find that although the cells undergo massive morphological remodeling and nanomechanical breakdown, the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) acts to maintain monolayer integrity. Via strong interactions between fibronectin and F-actin (fibronexus junctions), the ECM maintains and reinforces cell monolayers during breakdown. This study sheds new insights on our understanding of apoptosis and how biological systems utilize multiple inter- and intra-cytoarchitectures to regulate nanomechanical breakdown.<newchar><newabs>16516916<newchar>A structural event in the progression of left ventricular (LV) failure is myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. The myocardial fibroblast is a major cell type influencing the ECM, but whether and to what degree specific phenotypic differences in myocardial fibroblasts can be demonstrated to occur in culture with the development of LV failure remains unclear. Adult pigs (25 kg) were used for control myocardial fibroblast preparations (N=5) or following pacing-induced LV failure (N=5; 240 bpm, 3 weeks). LV remodeling occurred with pacing as evidenced by increased LV end diastolic volume (132+/-11 vs. 60+/-4 mL for control; P&lt;0.05). Functional parameters including migration, adhesion, collagen and matrix metalloproteinase release were assessed in fibroblast cultures from passages 1-4. The following findings were consistent with each passage and the results were analyzed with control values set to 100%. Migration of LV failure fibroblasts increased by over 170% (P&lt;0.05). Adhesion to collagen I, laminin and fibronectin was increased by over 160% in LV failure fibroblasts (P&lt;0.05). beta(1) integrin density decreased by 50% in LV failure fibroblasts (P&lt;0.05). Fibrillar collagen release increased by over 130% and matrix metalloproteinase-2 increased by 140% in LV failure fibroblasts (P&lt;0.05). The unique findings of this study are two-fold. First, after a pathological stimulus in-vivo, adult myocardial fibroblasts maintain a consistent phenotype through early passages in-vivo. Second, a differential release of, and response to ECM components occurred in LV failure fibroblasts. Thus, a phenotypic transformation of the myocardial fibroblast occurs with the development of LV failure, which in turn may contribute to matrix remodeling and presents as a potential cellular therapeutic target.<newchar><newabs>21189687<newchar>Functional studies of the mouse quaking gene (Qk) have focused on its role in the postnatal central nervous system during myelination. However, the death of the majority of homozygous mouse quaking alleles revealed that quaking has a critical role in embryonic development prior to the start of myelination. Surprisingly, the lethal alleles revealed that quaking has a function in embryonic blood vessel formation and remodeling. Further studies ofthe extraembryonic yolk sac showed that Qk regulates visceral endoderm differentiated function at the cellular level, including the local synthesis of retinoic acid (RA), which then exerts paracrine control of endothelial cells within adjacent mesoderm. Endoderm-derived RA regulates proliferation of endothelial cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) production, which in a reciprocal manner, modulates visceral endoderm survival and function. Although exogenous RA can rescue endothelial cell growth control and ECM production in mutants carrying a lethal mutation, which lack functional Qk, neither visceral endoderm function nor vascular remodeling is restored. Thus, Qk also regulates cell autonomous functions of visceral endoderm that are critical for vascular remodeling. Interestingly, quaking is highly expressed during normal cardiac development, particularly in the outflow tract, suggesting potentially unique functions in the developing heart. Together, the work on Qk in mammalian embryos reveals an essential, yet under appreciated, role in cardiovascular development. This suggests that certain functions may remain conserved in the early embryo throughout the evolution of nonvertebrate and vertebrate organisms and that additional roles for quaking remain to be discovered.<newchar><newabs>19910495<newchar>Cellular remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), an essential component of many physiological and pathological processes, is dependent on the trafficking and secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (SNARE)-mediated membrane traffic has documented roles in cell-ECM interactions and the present study specifically examines SNARE function in the trafficking of MMPs during ECM degradation. Using the invasive human fibrosarcoma cell line HT-1080, we demonstrate that a plasma membrane SNARE, SNAP23, and an endosomal v-SNARE, VAMP3 (also known as cellubrevin), partly colocalize with MMP2 and MMP9, and that inhibition of these SNAREs using dominant-negative SNARE mutants impaired secretion of the MMPs. Inhibition of VAMP3, SNAP23 or syntaxin-13 using dominant-negative SNARES, RNA interference or tetanus toxin impaired trafficking of membrane type 1 MMP to the cell surface. Consistent with these observations, we found that blocking the function of these SNAREs reduced the ability of HT-1080 cells to degrade a gelatin substrate in situ and impaired invasion of HT-1080 cells in vitro. The results reveal the importance of VAMP3, syntaxin-13 and SNAP23 in the trafficking of MMP during degradation of ECM substrates and subsequent cellular invasion.<newchar><newabs>20641769<newchar>Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) maps information about tissues spatially and functionally. Protons (hydrogen nuclei) are widely used in imaging because of their abundance in water molecules. Water comprises ~80% of most soft tissue. The contrast of proton MRI depends primarily on the density of the nucleus (proton spins), the relaxation times of the nuclear magnetization (T1, longitudinal, and T2, transverse), the magnetic environment of the tissues, and the blood flow to the tissues. However, insufficient contrast between normal and diseased tissues requires the development of contrast agents. Most contrast agents affect the T1 and T2 relaxation times of the surrounding nuclei, mainly the protons of water. T2* is the spin–spin relaxation time composed of variations from molecular interactions and intrinsic magnetic heterogeneities of tissues in the magnetic field (1). Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (2). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (3). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (4). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (5-8). MMP-7, also known as matrilysin, is frequently overexpressed in human cancer tissues and is associated with cancer progression (9, 10). MMP-7 has been shown to play important roles not only in degradation of ECM proteins but also in the regulation of activation, degradation, and shedding of non-ECM proteins (11). Gadolinium (Gd), a lanthanide metal ion with seven unpaired electrons, has been shown to be very effective in enhancing proton relaxation because of its high magnetic moment and water coordination (12, 13). Gd-Labeled diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) was the first intravenous MRI contrast agent used clinically, and a number of similar Gd chelates have been developed in an effort to further improve clinical use. However, these low molecular weight Gd chelates have short blood and tissue retention times, which limit their use as imaging agents in the vasculature and cancer. Various macromolecular Gd complexes have demonstrated superior contrast enhancement for MRI of the vasculature and carcinomas (14-16); however, these Gd complexes cannot proceed into further clinical development because of high tissue accumulation and slow excretion of toxic Gd ions. Furthermore, they are largely nonspecific. An MMP-7 selective peptide, Pro-Leu-Ala-Leu-Lys-Arg-Asp-Arg (PLALKRDR), was found to be selectively cleaved by MMP-7 (17). Proteinase-modulated contrast agents (PCAs) are used with MRI to detect the activity of proteinases in vivo. The PCAs are based on the concept of a solubility switch, from hydrophilic to hydrophobic, which slows their efflux from the activity site. Gd-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N',N'',N''',N''''-tetraacetic acid-PLALKRDR (Gd-DOTA-PCA7-switch) was developed to detect MMP-7 activity in tumor-bearing mice.<newchar><newabs>21487384<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have important roles in several cancer-supporting cellular processes, such as extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, angiogenesis, apoptosis, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cell proliferation. This broad range of activity has led to considerable interest in the use of MMPs in the clinical setting as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers and as therapeutic targets. Levels of the different MMPs can be measured in several sample types, including paraffin-embedded or fresh frozen tissue, serum, plasma and urine, and by various analytical methodologies, such as immunohistochemistry, real-time PCR, western and northern blot analyses, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and zymography. Several MMPs have been identified as having potential diagnostic or prognostic utility, whether alone or in combination with currently available diagnostic tests or imaging modalities. Although the early broad-spectrum anti-MMP agents showed a lack of efficacy, our continually improving understanding of the complex physiologic and pathologic roles of MMPs might enable the development of new MMP-specific and tumor-specific therapies. Accordingly, MMPs will continue to be the subjects of intensive research in bladder cancer.<newchar><newabs>15157928<newchar>Bioscaffolds derived from xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) have been used in numerous tissue engineering applications. The safety and efficacy of such scaffolds when used for the repair and reconstruction of numerous body tissues including musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, urogenital and integumentary structures has been shown in both preclinical animal studies and in human clinical studies. More than 200,000 human patients have been implanted with xenogeneic ECM scaffolds. These ECM scaffolds are typically prepared from porcine organs such as small intestine or urinary bladder, which are subjected to decellularization and terminal sterilization without significant loss of the biologic effects of the ECM. The composition of these bioscaffolds includes the structural and functional proteins that are part of native mammalian extracellular matrix. The three-dimensional organization of these molecules distinguishes ECM scaffolds from synthetic scaffold materials and is associated with constructive tissue remodeling instead of scar tissue. The biologic response to these xenogeneic bioscaffolds, including the immune response, is discussed herein.<newchar><newabs>10689625<newchar>The activity of connective tissue cells is modulated by a number of factors present in their environment. In addition to the soluble factors such as hormones, cytokines or growth factors, cells also receive signals from the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) macromolecules. Moreover, they may degrade the ECM proteins and liberate peptides which may by themselves constitute new signals for the surrounding cells. Therefore, an actual regulation loop exists in connective tissue, constituted by peptides generated by ECM degradation and connective tissue cells. The term of &quot;matrikine&quot; has been proposed to designate such ECM-derived peptides able to regulate cell activity. In this review, we summarize some data obtained in our laboratory with two different matrikines: the tripeptide glycyl-histidyl-lysine (GHK) and the heptapeptide cysteinyl-asparaginyl-tyrosyl-tyrosyl-seryl-asparaginyl-serine (CNYYSNS). GHK is a potent activator of ECM synthesis and remodeling, whereas CNYYSNS is able to inhibit polymorphonuclear leukocytes activation and decrease the invasive capacities of cancer cells.<newchar><newabs>16801065<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM), the product of stromal cells, is now thought to make a dynamic network in tissues. Stromal cells can support other cells not only by direct contact but also via this ECM network. The regulated turnover and remodeling of ECM needs both ECM degrading enzymes named matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors called tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Through an understanding of their molecular structure, the nature of the enzymic activity of MMPs and the inhibitory action of TIMPs against MMPs have been well elucidated. Considering their potent inhibitory action against MMPs, TIMPs are thought to play an important role in maintaining ECM. However, other unique functions of TIMPs have been reported, such as erythroid potentiating activity, cell growth-promoting activity, embryogenesis-stimulating activity, steroidogenesis-stimulating activity and so on. This review covers this new field, and discusses what role TIMPs can play in controlling life. In the second part, we briefly introduce our recent date on TIMPs and hematopoiesis. Because TIMPs have a dual function, i.e. a potent inhibitory action against MMPs and cell growth promoting action, TIMPs are good candidates for tissue fibrosis. Our recent measurements of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 levels using serum and plasma from patients with platelet number disorders and cultured medium from various leukemia cell lines, shows that platelets are a rich source of TIMPs and that TIMP-1 is secreted in large amounts by megakaryoblastic- and erythro-leukemia cell lines. Proliferation of bone marrow fibroblasts can be stimulated by TIMP-1 and TIMP-2. Taken together, TIMPs might be one of the important factors for the process of myelofibrosis in some pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>12808230<newchar>Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), a mesenchymal cell type in hepatic parenchyma, have unique features with respect to their cellular origin, morphology, and function. Normal, quiescent HSCs function as major vitamin A-storing cells containing over 80% of total vitamin A in the body to maintain vitamin A homeostasis. HSCs are located between parenchymal cell plates and sinusoidal endothelial cells, and extend well-developed, long processes surrounding sinusoids in vivo as pericytes. However, HSCs are known to be 'activated' or 'transdifferentiated' to myofibroblast-like phenotype lacking cytoplasmic lipid droplets and long processes in pathological conditions such as liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, as well as merely during cell culture after isolation. HSCs are the predominant cell type producing extracellular matrix (ECM) components as well as ECM degrading metalloproteases in hepatic parenchyma, indicating that they play a pivotal role in ECM remodeling in both normal and pathological conditions. Recent findings have suggested that HSCs have a neural crest origin from their gene expression pattern similar to neural cell type and/or smooth muscle cells and myofibroblasts. The morphology and function of HSCs are regulated by ECM components as well as by cytokines and growth factors in vivo and in vitro. Liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy might be an invaluable model to clarify the HSC function in elaborate organization of liver tissue by cell-cell and cell-ECM interaction and by growth factor and cytokine regulation.<newchar><newabs>11404372<newchar>On their extravasation from the vascular system into inflamed tissues, leukocytes must maneuver through a complex insoluble network of molecules termed the extracellular matrix (ECM). Leukocytes navigate toward their target sites by adhering to ECM glycoproteins and secreting degradative enzymes, while constantly orienting themselves in response to specific signals in their surroundings. Cytokines and chemokines are key biological mediators that provide such signals for cell navigation. Although the individual effects of various cytokines have been well characterized, it is becoming increasingly evident that the mixture of cytokines encountered in the ECM provides important combinatorial signals that influence cell behavior. Herein, we present an overview of previous and ongoing studies that have examined how leukocytes integrate signals from different combinations of cytokines that they encounter either simultaneously or sequentially within the ECM, to dynamically alter their navigational activities. For example, we describe our findings that tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha acts as an adhesion-strengthening and stop signal for T cells migrating toward stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha, while transforming growth factor-beta down-regulates TNF-alpha-induced matrix metalloproteinase-9 secretion by monocytes. These findings indicate the importance of how one cytokine, such as TNF-alpha, can transmit diverse signals to different subsets of leukocytes, depending on its combination with other cytokines, its concentration, and its time and sequence of exposure. The combinatorial effects of multiple cytokines thus affect leukocytes in a step-by-step manner, whereby cells react to cytokine signals in their immediate vicinity by altering their adhesiveness, directional movement, and remodeling of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>18165051<newchar>Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is an integral membrane protein that participates in the processing and degradation of cell surface proteins and the extracellular matrix (ECM). This enzyme regulates ECM turnover in wound repair, promotes cell migration and activates other MMPs, such as MMP-2, which is involved in angiogenesis, cell migration and tumoral metastasis. An increase in pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, such as gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), has been associated with chronic wounds in inflammatory bowel diseases. However, the extent to which cytokines modulate MT1-MMP has not been totally defined. In this report, the effects of the bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and ECM-bound IFN-gamma on MT1-MMP expression and MMP-2 activity were evaluated by Western blot, RT-PCR and zymography in isolated intestinal epithelial and cultured HT-29 cells. In the presence of LPS, ECM-bound IFN-gamma, but not soluble IFN-gamma, reduced the enterocyte MT1-MMP protein expression. In addition, the active form of MMP-2 was also decreased in the presence of both LPS and IFN-gamma, indicating that lower MMP-2 activity accompanied the decrease in MT1-MMP expression. These results suggest the possibility that endotoxin and ECM-bound IFN-gamma may affect matrix remodeling by modulating matrix metalloproteinase in enterocytes during wound healing.<newchar><newabs>19160017<newchar>Mammary gland development, functional differentiation, and homeostasis are orchestrated and sustained by a balance of biochemical and biophysical cues from the organ's microenvironment. The three-dimensional microenvironment of the mammary gland, predominantly 'encoded' by a collaboration between the extracellular matrix (ECM), hormones, and growth factors, sends signals from ECM receptors through the cytoskeletal intracellular matrix to nuclear and chromatin structures resulting in gene expression; the ECM in turn is regulated and remodeled by signals from the nucleus. In this chapter, we discuss how coordinated ECM deposition and remodeling is necessary for mammary gland development, how the ECM provides structural and biochemical cues necessary for tissue-specific function, and the role of the cytoskeleton in mediating the extra--to intracellular dialogue occurring between the nucleus and the microenvironment. When operating normally, the cytoskeletal-mediated dynamic and reciprocal integration of tissue architecture and function directs mammary gland development, tissue polarity, and ultimately, tissue-specific gene expression. Cancer occurs when these dynamic interactions go awry for an extended time.<newchar><newabs>16308858<newchar>The principles and ultimate goals of regenerative medicine and developmental biology involve a complex sequence of events, culminating in the formation of structurally and functionally normal tissues and organs. The molecular composition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a critical role in cellular migration and differentiation events. Mammalian ECM, derived from various tissues and organs, has been used as a biologic scaffold for therapeutic regenerative applications. Hundreds of thousands of human patients have benefited from the use of biologic scaffolds composed of naturally occurring ECM. The mechanisms by which ECM induces constructive remodeling instead of scar tissue formation are only beginning to be understood. This article reviews composition of mammalian ECM, its poorly understood role in developmental biology, and the clinical applications that have resulted from the use of this naturally occurring scaffold.<newchar><newabs>17338671<newchar>Atherosclerotic plaque rupture, with subsequent occlusive thrombosis, is the underlying cause of most cases of sudden cardiac death. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are thought to mediate the progression of stable atherosclerotic lesions to an unstable phenotype that is prone to rupture through the destruction of strength-giving extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Smooth muscle cells secrete and deposit ECM proteins and are, therefore, considered protective against atherosclerotic plaque destabilization. However, similar to inflammatory cells (e.g., macrophages), smooth muscle cells release numerous MMPs that are capable of digesting ECM proteins. Thus, the interaction of smooth muscle cells and MMPs in atherosclerotic plaques is complex and not fully understood. Recently, research into the roles of MMPs and their endogenous inhibitors (tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases), and their effects on smooth muscle behavior during plaque destabilization has been aided by the development of reproducible animal models of plaque instability. A plethora of studies has demonstrated that MMPs directly modulate smooth muscle behavior with both beneficial and deleterious effects on atherosclerotic plaque stability, in addition to their canonical effects on ECM remodeling. Consequently, broad-spectrum MMP inhibition may inhibit plaque-stabilizing mechanisms, such as smooth muscle cell growth, while conversely retarding ECM destruction and subsequent rupture. Hence the development of selective MMP inhibitors, that spare inhibitory effects on smooth muscle cell function, may be useful therapies to prevent plaque rupture and in this regard MMP-12 appears to be a particularly attractive target.<newchar><newabs>19087875<newchar>Normal homeostatic adjustment of elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) involves remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the trabecular meshwork (TM). This entails sensing elevated IOP, releasing numerous activated proteinases to degrade existing ECM and concurrent biosynthesis of replacement ECM components. To increase or decrease IOP, the quantity, physical properties and/or organization of new components should be somewhat different from those replaced in order to modify outflow resistance. ECM degradation and replacement biosynthesis in the outflow pathway must be tightly controlled and focused to retain the complex structural organization of the tissue. Recently identified podosome- or invadopodia-like structures (PILS) may aid in the focal degradation of ECM and organization of replacement components.<newchar><newabs>16467530<newchar>The formation of dendritic spines during development and their structural plasticity in the adult brain are critical aspects of synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Many different factors and proteins have been shown to control dendritic spine development and remodeling (Ethell and Pasquale, 2005). The extracellular matrix (ECM) components and their cell surface receptors, integrins, have been found in the vicinity of synapses and shown to regulate synaptic efficacy and play an important role in long-term potentiation (Bahr et al., 1997; Chavis and Westbrook, 2001; Chan et al., 2003; Lin et al., 2003; Bernard-Trifilo et al., 2005). Although molecular mechanisms by which integrins affect synaptic efficacy have begun to emerge, their role in structural plasticity is poorly understood. Here, we show that integrins are involved in spine remodeling in cultured hippocampal neurons. The treatment of 14 d in vitro hippocampal neurons with arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD)-containing peptide, an established integrin ligand, induced elongation of existing dendritic spines and promoted formation of new filopodia. These effects were also accompanied by integrin-dependent actin reorganization and synapse remodeling, which were partially inhibited by function-blocking antibodies against beta1 and beta3 integrins. This actin reorganization was blocked with the NMDA receptor (NMDAR) antagonist MK801 [(+)-5-methyl-10,11-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cyclohepten-5,10-imine hydrogen maleate]. The Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) inhibitor KN93 (N-[2-[N-(4-chlorocinnamyl)-N-methylaminomethyl]phenyl]-N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methoxybenzenesulfonamide) also suppressed RGD-induced actin reorganization and synapse remodeling. Our findings show that integrins control ECM-mediated spine remodeling in hippocampal neurons through NMDAR/CaMKII-dependent actin reorganization.<newchar><newabs>16820347<newchar>Laboratory studies have shown that angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) can affect extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism and thereby have a beneficial effect on vascular remodeling. The aim of this study was to examine the clinical effects of the ARB candesartan cilexetil on serum markers of synthesis and degradation of ECM, as well as their relation to changes in arterial stiffness in hypertensive patients. Twenty-three patients with essential hypertension were recruited for this study. Markers related to ECM synthesis and degradation (procollagen type 1 propeptide [PIP], procollagen type III propeptide [PIIIP], matrix metalloproteinase-3 [MMP-3, stromelysin-1], tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases [TIMP-1], and hyaluronic acid [HA]) were examined both before and after one year of treatment with candesartan. Pulse-wave velocity [PWV] and ankle-brachial pressure index [ABI] were measured two months (i.e., after achieving blood pressure reduction) and one year after the initiation of therapy. PWV values after one year of treatment with ARB were significantly decreased compared to previous values, whereas ABI values were unchanged. Treatment with ARB was also associated with a significant decrease in serum PIIIP values and an increase in serum stromelysin-1, whereas changes in PIP, TIMP-1, and HA did not achieve statistical significance. A significant relationship was found between the changes in PWV and the changes in stromelysin-1 levels after correction for blood pressure and heart rate (p = 0.02). These results suggest that the treatment for just one year with ARB results in significant changes in markers of ECM metabolism as well as PWV. These effects on ECM metabolism could have a beneficial effect in decreasing vascular pathology in patients with essential hypertension.<newchar><newabs>15502110<newchar>Airway smooth muscle (ASM) accumulation and enrichment of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with type I collagen and fibronectin are major pathologic features of airway remodeling in asthma. These ECM components confer enhanced ASM proliferation in vitro, but a requirement for specific integrin ECM receptors has not been examined. Here, we examined the mitogen platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB on beta1-integrin expression on human ASM cells cultured on these ECM substrates and defined the involvement of specific integrins in cell attachment and proliferation using integrin-neutralizing antibodies. PDGF-BB-dependent proliferation was enhanced two- to threefold by monomeric type I collagen or fibronectin and to a lesser extent by vitronectin; other interstitial ECM components (fibrillar type I and III collagen and tenascin-C) had no effect. Except for increased alpha3 expression induced by PDGF-BB and monomeric type I collagen or fibronectin, alpha1, alpha2, alpha4, alpha5, alphav, and alphavbeta3 integrins were unchanged compared with unstimulated cells on plastic. Blocking antibodies revealed alpha2beta1- and alphavbeta3-mediated attachment to monomeric type I collagen, whereas attachment to fibronectin required alpha5beta1. In contrast, enhancement of PDGF-BB-dependent proliferation by either monomeric type I collagen or fibronectin required alpha2beta1, alpha4beta1, and alpha5beta1 integrins. These data suggest multiple beta1-integrins regulate enhanced ASM proliferative responses.<newchar><newabs>18677407<newchar>Inflammation plays a critical role in the development of cardiovascular diseases. Infiltration of leukocytes to sites of injury requires their exit from the blood and migration across basement membrane; this process has been postulated to require remodeling of the ECM. Plasminogen (Plg) is a protease that binds to the ECM and, upon conversion to plasmin, degrades multiple ECM proteins. In addition, plasmin directly activates MMPs. Here, we used Plg(-/-) mice to investigate the role of Plg in inflammatory leukocyte migration. After induction of peritonitis by thioglycollate injection, we found that Plg(-/-) mice displayed diminished macrophage trans-ECM migration and decreased MMP-9 activation. Furthermore, injection of the active form of MMP-9 in Plg(-/-) mice rescued macrophage migration in this model. We used periaortic application of CaCl2 to induce abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and found that Plg(-/-) mice displayed reduced macrophage infiltration and were protected from aneurysm formation. Administration of active MMP-9 to Plg(-/-) mice promoted macrophage infiltration and the development of AAA. These data suggest that Plg regulates macrophage migration in inflammation via activation of MMP-9, which, in turn, regulates the ability of the cells to migrate across ECM. Thus, targeting the Plg/MMP-9 pathway may be an attractive approach to regulate inflammatory responses and AAA development.<newchar><newabs>18777113<newchar>Recent studies have challenged the conventional hypothesis that inflammation is the major player in the fibrosis cascade. Emerging evidence points to a critical role for interactions between tissue-resident and infiltrating, non-resident cells, in mediating fibrotic responses. Improved understanding of the biology of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and the pathways that regulate assembly of the ECM and its interactions with growth factors/cytokines have led to the identification of new and attractive therapeutic targets. These include molecules that regulate fibrocytic cell infiltration, epithelial and myofibroblast differentiation, ECM synthesis and degradation. However, it is imperative that these new therapies be timed and compartmentalized to target the tissue of interest, as the dynamics of cellular differentiation and ECM remodeling may be different between organ systems. This review will summarize the current understanding of the mechanisms involved in the development of fibrosis, based on recent in vitro and in vivo studies, and comment on novel molecular pathways for drug discovery.<newchar><newabs>12631724<newchar>The degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) by matrix metalloproteases is crucial in physiological and pathological cell invasion alike. Degradation occurs at specific sites where invasive cells make contact with the ECM via specialized plasma membrane protrusions termed invadopodia. Herein, we show that the dynamin 2 (Dyn2), a GTPase implicated in the control of actin-driven cytoskeletal remodeling events and membrane transport, is necessary for focalized matrix degradation at invadopodia. Dynamin was inhibited by using two approaches: 1) expression of dominant negative GTPase-impaired or proline-rich domain-deleted Dyn2 mutants; and 2) inhibition of the dynamin regulator calcineurin by cyclosporin A. In both cases, the number and extension of ECM degradation foci were drastically reduced. To understand the site and mechanism of dynamin action, the cellular structures devoted to ECM degradation were analyzed by correlative confocal light-electron microscopy. Invadopodia were found to be organized into a previously undescribed ECM-degradation structure consisting of a large invagination of the ventral plasma membrane surface in close spatial relationship with the Golgi complex. Dyn2 seemed to be concentrated at invadopodia.<newchar><newabs>12045020<newchar>Human endometrium is a unique tissue that undergoes sequential phases of proliferation, and secretory changes followed by tissue shedding and bleeding during menstruation. Tissue remodeling is a distinct feature of human endometrium in the secretory phase which prepares endometrium for implantation during the &quot;receptive phase&quot; of the cycle. A discrete dissolution of extracellular matrix (ECM) by a host of enzymes called matrix metalloproteases (MMP) is required for a successful implantation. In the absence of implantation, as a result of progesterone withdrawal, human endometrium loses its receptive state in the premenstrual period and subsequently undergoes a generalized breakdown of ECM by MMPs during menstruation. The homeostasis of ECM of endometrium and the delicate balance between its synthesis and degradation appear to be mediated by reciprocal interaction between TGF-beta and ebaf (lefty) signaling. While TGF-beta acts as a pro-fibrogenic cytokine and maintains the integrity of ECM in endometrium, expression of lefty is associated with events that lead to destruction of ECM facilitating tissue shedding.<newchar><newabs>10037798<newchar>Lymphocytes accumulate within the extracellular matrix (ECM) of tumor, wound, or inflammatory tissues. These tissues are largely comprised of polymerized adhesion proteins such as fibrin and fibronectin or their fragments. Nonactivated lymphoid cells attach preferentially to polymerized ECM proteins yet are unable to attach to monomeric forms or fragments of these proteins without previous activation. This adhesion event depends on the appropriate spacing of integrin adhesion sites. Adhesion of nonactivated lymphoid cells to polymeric ECM components results in activation of the antigen receptor-associated Syk kinase that accumulates in adhesion-promoting podosomes. In fact, activation of Syk by antigen or agonists, as well as expression of an activated Syk mutant in lymphoid cells, facilitates their adhesion to monomeric ECM proteins or their fragments. These results reveal a cooperative interaction between signals emanating from integrins and antigen receptors that can serve to regulate stable lymphoid cell adhesion and retention within a remodeling ECM.<newchar><newabs>15142969<newchar>The proteoglycan versican is one of several extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules that accumulate in lesions of atherosclerosis and restenosis. Its unique structural features create a highly interactive molecule that binds growth factors, enzymes, lipoproteins, and a variety of other ECM components to influence fundamental events involved in vascular disease. Versican is one of the principal genes that is upregulated after vascular injury and is a prominent component in stented and nonstented restenotic lesions. The synthesis of versican is highly regulated by specific growth factors and cytokines and the principal source of versican is the smooth muscle cell. Versican interacts with hyaluronan, a long chain glycosaminoglycan, to create expanded viscoelastic pericellular matrices that are required for arterial smooth muscle cell (ASMC) proliferation and migration. Versican is also prominent in advanced lesions of atherosclerosis, at the borders of lipid-filled necrotic cores as well as at the plaque-thrombus interface, suggesting roles in lipid accumulation, inflammation, and thrombosis. Versican influences the assembly of ECM and controls elastic fiber fibrillogenesis, which is of fundamental importance in ECM remodeling during vascular disease. Collectively, these studies highlight the critical importance of this specific ECM component in atherosclerosis and restenosis.<newchar><newabs>21276799<newchar>The heart is a mechanosensitive organ that adapts its morphology to changing hemodynamic conditions via a process named mechanotransduction, which is the primary means of detecting mechanical stress in the extracellular environment. In the heart, mechanical signals are propagated into the intracellular space primarily via cell adhesion complexes and are subsequently transmitted from cell to cell via paracrine signaling. Enhanced excitation-contraction coupling increases myocardial contractility in various experimental models. However, these animal models routinely show increased susceptibility to biomechanical stress with the development of early ventricular dilation and reduced systolic function in the setting of adverse myocardial remodeling. The enhanced susceptibility of the PI3Kγ knockout mice to biomechanical stress is linked to a cAMP-dependent up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinase with a loss of N-cadherin mediated cell adhesion. Enhancing cell-cell adhesion and cell-ECM interaction will promote the salutary effects of enhanced intracellular Ca(2+) cycling on whole heart function and booster the therapeutic potential of normalizing intracellular Ca(2+) cycling in patients with heart failure.<newchar><newabs>17293376<newchar>Changes in the ECM and increased airway smooth muscle (ASM) mass are major contributors to airway remodeling in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It has recently been demonstrated that ECM proteins may differentially affect proliferation and expression of phenotypic markers of cultured ASM cells. In the present study, we investigated the functional relevance of ECM proteins in the modulation of ASM contractility using bovine tracheal smooth muscle (BTSM) preparations. The results demonstrate that culturing of BSTM strips for 4 days in the presence of fibronectin or collagen I depressed maximal contraction (E(max)) both for methacholine and KCl, which was associated with decreased contractile protein expression. By contrast, both fibronectin and collagen I increased proliferation of cultured BTSM cells. Similar effects were observed for PDGF. Moreover, PDGF augmented fibronectin- and collagen I-induced proliferation in an additive fashion, without an additional effect on contractility or contractile protein expression. The fibronectin-induced depression of contractility was blocked by the integrin antagonist Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (RGDS) but not by its negative control Gly-Arg-Ala-Asp-Ser-Pro (GRADSP). Laminin, by itself, did not affect contractility or proliferation but reduced the effects of PDGF on these parameters. Strong relationships were found between the ECM-induced changes in E(max) in BTSM strips and their proliferative responses in BSTM cells and for E(max) and contractile protein expression. Our results indicate that ECM proteins differentially regulate both phenotype and function of intact ASM.<newchar><newabs>21220153<newchar>During late gestation in the mare, rapid fetal growth is accompanied by considerable placental growth and further invasion of the endometrium by microvilli. This growth requires extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In early pregnancy, we know that matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and -2 are involved in the endometrial invasion during endometrial cup formation. The present study investigated whether MMPs are found in fetal fluids later in gestation and during parturition, and if there was a difference in their activities between normal and preterm delivery. Amniotic fluids were collected from pony mares during the latter half of gestation, and amniotic and allantoic fluids from pony and thoroughbred mares at foaling. The fluids were analysed for the activity of MMP-9 and -2, and TIMPs using zymography techniques. There was an increase (P = 0.002) in activity of latent MMP-9 when approaching normal foaling, and a decrease (P &lt; 0.001) during foaling. MMP-2 activity did not change through gestation, or during foaling. When comparing samples from pregnancies resulting in preterm deliveries with samples from foaling mares, the activity of MMP-9 was lower (P &lt; 0.001) and MMP-2 activity was higher (P = 0.004) during foaling than preceding preterm delivery. The activity of MMP-9 was lower (P = 0.002) prior to preterm delivery than before delivery of a live foal at term, whereas no difference (P = 0.07) was demonstrated for latent MMP-2 activity when comparing the same groups. The activity of TIMP-2 was higher (P &lt; 0.001) in the pre-parturient period before normal foaling than preceding preterm delivery. These results suggest that MMPs may have a role as markers for high risk pregnancy in the mare.<newchar><newabs>21307399<newchar>Invadopodia are extracellular matrix (ECM)-degrading protrusions formed by invasive cancer cells. Podosomes are structures functionally similar to invadopodia that are found in oncogene-transformed fibroblasts and monocyte-derived cells, including macrophages and osteoclasts. These structures are thought to play important roles in the pericellular remodeling of ECM during cancer invasion and metastasis. Much effort has been directed toward identification of the molecular components and regulators of invadopodia/podosomes, which could be therapeutic targets in the treatment of malignant cancers. However, it remains largely unknown how these components are assembled into invadopodia/podosomes and how the assembly process is spatially and temporally regulated. This review will summarize recent progress on the molecular mechanisms of invadopodia/podosome formation, with strong emphasis on the roles of lipid rafts and phosphoinositides.<newchar><newabs>20556665<newchar>Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction is an important predictor of prognosis and mortality of heart failure. Increased left ventricular stiffness can be associated with excessive myocardial fibrosis and increased cross-linked collagen by the enzyme lysyl oxidase (LOX). These cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling processes are affected by T-lymphocyte function and phenotype. We sought to examine the role of T lymphocytes in myocardial LOX regulation in diet-induced fibrotic hearts. Female SCID mice, devoid of functional T lymphocytes, and wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 were treated with a high-fat high-simple carbohydrate (HFHSC) diet for 12 months. HFHSC-fed WT mice demonstrated a significant increase in the catalytic activity of myocardial LOX compared with respective controls. These changes coincided with a marked increase in ECM collagen cross-linking and impaired diastolic filling pattern. However, induction of LOX was minimal in the SCID mice compared with the WT group. Correspondingly fibrillar cross-linked collagen concentrations and diastolic dysfunction were less prominent in the SCID mice compared with the WT group. Our results suggest a role for T lymphocytes in this dietary induction of diastolic dysfunction through modulation of LOX-dependent collagen maturation.<newchar><newabs>21155761<newchar>The refractive errors, myopia and hyperopia, are optical defects of the visual system that can cause blurred vision. Uncorrected refractive errors are the most common causes of visual impairment worldwide. It is estimated that 2.5 billion people will be affected by myopia alone within the next decade. Experimental, epidemiological and clinical research has shown that refractive development is influenced by both environmental and genetic factors. Animal models have showed that eye growth and refractive maturation during infancy are tightly regulated by visually guided mechanisms. Observational data in human populations provide compelling evidence that environmental influences and individual behavioral factors play crucial roles in myopia susceptibility. Nevertheless, the majority of the variance of refractive error within populations is thought to be because of hereditary factors. Genetic linkage studies have mapped two dozen loci, while association studies have implicated more than 25 different genes in refractive variation. Many of these genes are involved in common biological pathways known to mediate extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and regulate connective tissue remodeling. Other associated genomic regions suggest novel mechanisms in the etiology of human myopia, such as mitochondrial-mediated cell death or photoreceptor-mediated visual signal transmission. Taken together, observational and experimental studies have revealed the complex nature of human refractive variation, which likely involves variants in several genes and functional pathways. Multiway interactions between genes and/or environmental factors may also be important in determining individual risks of myopia, and may help explain the complex pattern of refractive error in human populations.<newchar><newabs>19926126<newchar>The study of how cell behavior is controlled by the biophysical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is limited in part by the lack of three-dimensional (3D) scaffolds that combine the biofunctionality of native ECM proteins with the tunability of synthetic materials. Here, we introduce a biomaterial platform in which the biophysical properties of collagen I are progressively altered by adding agarose. We find that agarose increases the elasticity of 3D collagen ECMs over two orders of magnitude with modest effect on collagen fiber organization. Surprisingly, increasing the agarose content slows and eventually stops invasion of glioma cells in a 3D spheroid model. Electron microscopy reveals that agarose forms a dense meshwork between the collagen fibers, which we postulate slows invasion by structurally coupling and reinforcing the collagen fibers and introducing steric barriers to motility. This is supported by time lapse imaging of individual glioma cells and multicellular spheroids, which shows that addition of agarose promotes amoeboid motility and restricts cell-mediated remodeling of individual collagen fibers. Our results are consistent with a model in which agarose shifts ECM dissipation of cell-induced stresses from non-affine deformation of individual collagen fibers to bulk-affine deformation of a continuum network.<newchar><newabs>20619789<newchar>Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the potential to offer a virtually unlimited source of chondrogenic cells for use in cartilage repair and regeneration. We have recently shown that expandable chondrogenic cells can be derived from hESCs under selective growth factor-responsive conditions. In this study, we explore the potential of these hESC-derived chondrogenic cells to produce an extracellular matrix (ECM)-enriched cartilaginous tissue construct when cultured in hyaluronic acid (HA)-based hydrogel, and further investigated the long-term reparative ability of the resulting hESC-derived chondrogenic cell-engineered cartilage (HCCEC) in an osteochondral defect model. We hypothesized that HCCEC can provide a functional template capable of undergoing orderly remodeling during the repair of critical-sized osteochondral defects (1.5 mm in diameter, 1 mm depth into the subchondral bone) in a rat model. In the process of repair, we observed an orderly spatial-temporal remodeling of HCCEC over 12 weeks into osteochondral tissue, with characteristic architectural features including a hyaline-like neocartilage layer with good surface regularity and complete integration with the adjacent host cartilage and a regenerated subchondral bone. By 12 weeks, the HCCEC-regenerated osteochondral tissue resembled closely that of age-matched unoperated native control, while only fibrous tissue filled in the control defects which left empty or treated with hydrogel alone. Here we demonstrate that transplanted hESC-derived chondrogenic cells maintain long-term viability with no evidence of tumorigenicity, providing a safe, highly-efficient and practical strategy of applying hESCs for cartilage tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>20027633<newchar>Granzyme B (GrB) is a serine proteinase known to be expressed by cytotoxic lymphocytes and to induce, in presence of perforin (Pf), apoptosis in target cells. Recently, GrB expression has been shown (often in absence of Pf) in nonlymphoid cells, but its function is not defined. In our study, we investigated GrB and Pf expression in bladder cancer cell lines and in urothelial carcinoma (UC) tissues by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blot, ELISA, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. We also assessed the function of GrB in UC cells; the in vitro function of GrB was examined by loss-of-function experiments. Our results revealed that GrB is expressed, in absence of Pf, in UC cells. Significant differences were found between GrB expression and both increasing pathological tumor spreading and high-grade vs. low-grade pTa tumors. Notably, GrB in UC tissues was concentrated at the cancer invasion front and was expressed in neoplastic cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a key event in carcinoma invasion. Indeed, GrB-positive cells also expressed Snail, N-cadherin or were negative for E-cadherin. GrB expressed in tumor cell lines was enzymatically active and capable of vitronectin cleavage, implying extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by GrB. Inhibition of GrB activity or Stealth RNA interference-mediated GrB gene silencing markedly suppressed bladder cancer cell invasion through matrigel. This data provides the first evidence for a role of GrB in promoting cancer cell invasion. Taken together, our findings suggest that GrB, via ECM degradation, contributes to the establishment of the UC invasive phenotype.<newchar><newabs>21472307<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases that are collectively capable of cleaving virtually all extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates and play an important role in diverse physiological and pathological processes. The activity of MMPs is controlled at multiple levels, and the transcriptional regulation of MMPs appears to represent a necessary step in its regulation. MMP-3 is a key member of the MMP family with broad substrate specificity, and is crucial to the connective tissue remodeling process. It is also involved in the turnover of the numerous ECM components. A common functional promoter polymorphism of MMP-3, 5A/6A, affects its activity and has been associated with various diseases. This polymorphism may be used as a genetic marker for certain pathologies to identify individual susceptibility. This review discusses various topics related to MMP-3 in pathological processes, with a focus on the 5A/6A polymorphism.<newchar><newabs>20538003<newchar>The transmembrane glycoprotein extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN), and the pleiotropic proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-18, play critical roles in myocardial remodeling, by inducing matrix degrading metalloproteinases (MMPs). Previously we showed that IL-18 induces EMMPRIN expression in cardiomyocytes via MyD88/IRAK4/TRAF6/JNK-dependent Sp1 activation. Here in reciprocal studies we demonstrate that EMMPRIN is a potent inducer of IL-18 transcription, protein expression and protein secretion in primary mouse cardiomyocytes. We show for the first time that EMMPRIN stimulates the activation of NF-kappaB, AP-1, CREB, and ATF-2 in cardiomyocytes, and induces IL-18 expression via Rac1-dependent PI3K/Akt/IKK/NF-kappaB and MKK7/JNK/AP-1 signaling. Moreover, EMMPRIN induces robust time-dependent induction of various MMP mRNAs. EMMPRIN also induces the mRNA of TIMPs 1 and 3, but in a delayed fashion. These results suggest that IL-18-induced EMMPRIN expression may favor net MMP expression and ECM destruction, and thus identify both as potential therapeutic targets in countering adverse myocardial remodeling.<newchar><newabs>20641793<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to study biological functions of specific targets (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (650–900 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (5). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infraction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (6-9). The cysteine proteases (cathepsin B, H, and L) and serine protease (cathepsin D) are present in the intracellular endosomal system of cells such as macrophages, epithelial cells, and tumor cells. These proteases participate in degradation of ECM and remodeling of tissues. A synthetic protected graft copolymer (PGC) consisting of poly-L-lysine (PL) with multiple methoxypolyethylene glycol (MPEG) side chains has been used as a drug carrier with efficient accumulation in tumor (10, 11). Weissleder et al. (12) attached multiple Cy5.5 NIR dye molecules to the unmodified PL side chains to form a fluorescence-quenched polymer, Cy5.5-PL-MPEG (Cy5.5-PGC). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which results in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the lysine-lysine bond is cleaved by proteases, releasing fragments that contain Cy5.5. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). Cy5.5-PGC is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of cathepsin B proteolytic activity in tumors, atherosclerosis, and other diseases.<newchar><newabs>17950323<newchar>Naturally derived extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds have been successfully used to promote constructive remodeling of injured or missing tissue in a variety of anatomical locations, including abdominal wall repair. Furthermore, ECM scaffolds have shown the ability to resist infection and adhesion formation. The present study investigated the utility of an ECM scaffold, specifically, porcine urinary bladder matrix (UBM), for repair of a 5 x 5 cm full-thickness lateral thoracic wall defect in a canine model (n = 6) including 5-cm segments of the 6th and 7th rib. The resected portion of the 7th rib was replaced as an interpositional graft along with the UBM scaffold. As a control, a Gore-Tex patch was used to repair the same defect (n = 2). The control animals healed by encapsulation of the Gore-Tex patch by dense collagenous tissue. The remodeled UBM grafts showed the presence of site-specific tissue, including organized fibrous connective tissue, muscle tissue, adipose tissue, and bone. Upon fluoroscopic examination, it was shown that both bony defects were replaced with new calcified bone. In the 6th rib space, new bone bridged the entire span. In the 7th rib space, there was evidence of bone formation between the interpositional graft and the existing bone, as well as de novo formation of organized bone in the shape of the missing rib segment parallel to the interpositional graft. This study shows that a naturally occurring ECM scaffold promotes site-specific constructive remodeling in a large thoracic wall defect.<newchar><newabs>17700531<newchar>Inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene predisposes to vascular tumor formation in several organs. VHL regulates two evolutionary conserved pathways: the targeting of hydroxylated hypoxia-inducible factor-alpha (HIF-alpha) for proteasomal degradation and the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). The biochemical mechanisms of the ECM assembly pathway remain poorly defined. Here, we provide evidence supporting a biochemical role for VHL in ECM assembly. We show that VHL directly binds to the collagen IV alpha 2 (COL4A2) chain and that this interaction is necessary for its assembly into the ECM. The VHL-COL4A2 interaction is dependent on endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mediated COL4A2 hydroxylation and independent of cytosolic, hypoxia regulated HIF-alpha-modifying enzymes. We find that the N-terminal tail of COL4A2 protrudes from the ER lumen into the cytosol where it is bound by VHL. Failure of VHL to interact with COL4A2 correlates with loss of collagen IV network formation in vitro and collagen IV remodeling in vivo. Our data suggest a HIF-alpha-independent role for the VHL-COL4A2 interaction in suppression of angiogenic tumor formation through collagen IV network assembly.<newchar><newabs>16901744<newchar>Heparanase is an endoglycosidase which cleaves heparan sulfate (HS) and hence participates in degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Heparanase is preferentially expressed in human tumors and its over-expression in tumor cells confers an invasive phenotype in experimental animals. The enzyme also releases angiogenic factors from the ECM and thereby induces an angiogenic response in vivo. Heparanase upregulation correlates with increased tumor vascularity and poor post-operative survival of cancer patients. Heparanase is synthesized as a 65 kDa inactive precursor that undergoes proteolytic cleavage, yielding 8 and 50 kDa protein subunits that heterodimerize to form an active enzyme. Human heparanase is localized primarily within late endosomes and lysosomes and occasionally on the cell surface and within the cell nucleus. Transcriptional activity of the heparanase promoter is stimulated by demethylation, early growth response 1 (EGR1) transcription factor, estrogen, inflammatory cytokines and inactivation of p53. N-acetylated glycol-split species of heparin as well as siRNA heparanase gene silencing inhibit tumor metastasis and angiogenesis in experimental models. These observations and the unexpected identification of a single functional heparanase, suggest that the enzyme is a promising target for anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory drug development. Heparanase exhibits also non-enzymatic activities, independent of its involvement in ECM degradation and changes in the extracellular microenvironment. For example, cell surface expression of heparanase elicits a firm cell adhesion, reflecting an involvement in cell-ECM interaction. Heparanase enhances Akt signaling and stimulates PI3K- and p38-dependent endothelial cell migration and invasion. It also promotes VEGF expression via the Src pathway. The enzyme may thus activate endothelial cells and elicits angiogenic and survival responses. Studies with heparanase over-expressing transgenic mice revealed that the enzyme functions in normal processes involving cell mobilization, HS turnover, tissue vascularization and remodeling. In this review, we summarize the current status of heparanase research, emphasizing molecular and cellular aspects of the enzyme, including its mode of processing and activation, control of heparanase gene expression, enzymatic and non-enzymatic functions, and causal involvement in cancer metastasis and angiogenesis. We also discuss clinical aspects and strategies for the development of heparanase inhibitors.<newchar><newabs>16601761<newchar>A significant number of myocardial diseases are accompanied by increased synthesis and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) as well as by changed maturation and incorporation of ECM components. Important groups of enzymes responsible for both normal and pathological processes in ECM remodeling are matrix metaloproteinases (MMPs). These enzymes share a relatively conserved structure with a number of identifiable modules linked to their specific functions. The most important function of MMPs is the ability to cleave various ECM components; including such rigid molecules as fibrillar collagen molecules. The amount and activity of MMPs in cardiac tissue are regulated by a range of activating and inhibiting processes. Although MMPs play multifarious roles in many myocardial diseases, here we have focused on their function in ischemic cardiac tissue, dilated cardiomyopathy and hypertrophied cardiac tissue. The inhibition of MMPs by means of synthetic inhibitors seems to be a promising strategy in cardiac disease treatment. Their effects on diseased cardiac tissue have been successfully tested in several experimental studies.<newchar><newabs>16533084<newchar>The field of tissue engineering/regenerative medicine combines the quantitative principles of engineering with the principles of the life sciences toward the goal of reconstituting structurally and functionally normal tissues and organs. There has been relatively little application of tissue engineering efforts toward the organs of speech, voice, and hearing. The present manuscript describes a study that was conducted in which a biologic scaffold derived from porcine (pig) extracellular matrix (ECM) was used to repair the defect following a hemilaryngectomy procedure in dogs. The ECM-augmented repair was compared with a control standard strap muscle (STM) procedure. The animals were sacrificed after 24 weeks at which time anatomic and histologic analyses were conducted. The ECM repair resulted in a macroscopic and microscopic reconstruction of laryngeal tissue that was superior to that observed with the STM procedure. The importance of regenerated tissue having the same structural and functional characteristics of native tissue is emphasized. A discussion of the mechanisms of ECM remodeling is presented along with the implications of such remodeling in the repair of laryngeal structures.<newchar><newabs>20546890<newchar>Bone repairs represent a major focus in orthopedic medicine with biomaterials as a critical aspect of the regenerative process. However, only a limited set of biomaterials are utilized today and few studies relate biomaterial scaffold design to degradation rate and new bone formation. Matching biomaterial remodeling rate towards new bone formation is important in terms of the overall rate and quality of bone regeneration outcomes. We report on the osteogenesis and metabolism of human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in 3D silk scaffolds. The scaffolds were prepared with two different degradation rates in order to study relationships between matrix degradation, cell metabolism and bone tissue formation in vitro. SEM, histology, chemical assays, real-time PCR and metabolic analyses were assessed to investigate these relationships. More extensively mineralized ECM formed in the scaffolds designed to degrade more rapidly, based on SEM, von Kossa and type I collagen staining and calcium content. Measures of osteogenic ECM were significantly higher in the more rapidly degrading scaffolds than in the more slowly degrading scaffolds over 56 days of study in vitro. Metabolic analysis, including glucose and lactate levels, confirmed the degradation rate differences with the two types of scaffolds, with the more rapidly degrading scaffolds supporting higher levels of glucose consumption and lactate synthesis by the hMSCs upon osteogenesis, in comparison to the more slowly degrading scaffolds. The results demonstrate that scaffold degradation rates directly impact the metabolism of hMSCs, and in turn the rate of osteogenesis. An understanding of the interplay between cellular metabolism and scaffold degradability should aid in the more rational design of scaffolds for bone regeneration needs both in vitro and in vivo.<newchar><newabs>15728796<newchar>Heparanase (HPSE) is an endoglycosidase that cleaves heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), major components of the basement membrane (BM) and extracellular matrix (ECM). Heparanase activity results in release of HSPG-bound molecules, including basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2). Structural and functional development of the corpus luteum (CL) involves tissue remodeling, active angiogenesis, and steroid production. Heparanase-induced ECM and BM breakdown as well as FGF2-stimulated endothelial proliferation may have an important role in the regulation of luteal function. Heparanase mRNA was detected by reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction in granulosa cells recovered from follicular fluid of in vitro fertilization patients. Using sulfate-labeled ECM, heparanase enzymatic activity was determined in human luteinized granulosa cells. Employing immunohistochemistry, heparanase protein was localized predominantly in the theca interna cell layer of the mature antral follicle, whereas in human corpora lutea, both luteinized granulosa and theca cells were immunostained for heparanase. During luteolysis, heparanase was identified in macrophages surrounding the forming corpus albicans. In serially sectioned ovaries from unstimulated rats as well as from eCG-treated rats, expression of heparanase was noted exclusively in the ovarian steroid-producing interstitial tissue. Following an ovulatory dose of hCG, heparanase was immunostained also in lutein cells of the forming corpora lutea. Temporal expression of heparanase in granulosa cells during the luteal phase and in macrophages during luteal regression supports the hypothesis that heparanase plays a role in human ovarian ECM remodeling and may potentiate cellular migration and growth factor bioavailability.<newchar><newabs>16160874<newchar>Fibrillar collagens I and III, nonfibrillar collagen IV, and the glycoproteins fibronectin and laminin, are elements of the myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM). Alterations in the normal concentrations and ratios of these elements may reflect remodeling in response to physiologic stress. In the case of patients' post-heart transplantation (HTx), specific patterns of alteration may herald myocardial dysfunction. Right ventricular biopsies were taken from the same 28 HTx patients before implantation and 1 week, 2 weeks, and 1, 2, and 3 years after HTx. The above-noted five ECM proteins, six matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and two of their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) were detected by immunohistochemistry and scored as cells per square millimeter or semiquantitatively. The total connective tissue fibers were detected by connective tissue stain and morphometry. Variations in these ECM components were followed in the same patient cohort over 3 years. In summary, during the first 2 weeks after HTx, a predominant increase in connective tissue occurred. Increases in MMP-8 and MMP-9 were found. By 3 years after transplantation, there was a decrease of connective tissue fibers and a significant reduction of all ECM components and an increase in MMPs and TIMPs. These findings may reflect a pattern of remodeling specific to the transplanted heart.<newchar><newabs>14974720<newchar>Synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and their degradation by matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are part of the dermal remodeling resulting from chronic exposure of skin to ultraviolet radiation (UVR). We have compared two alternative mechanisms for these responses, namely, a direct mechanism in which UV-B or UV-A is absorbed by fibroblasts and an indirect mechanism in which cytokines, produced in skin in response to UVR, stimulate production of the ECM proteins and MMP. These studies were carried out on human dermal fibroblasts grown in contracted, free-floating 9 day old collagen gels as a dermal equivalent. Synthesis of tropoelastin, collagen, fibrillin, MMP-1, -2, -3 and -9 and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP)-1 and -2 were measured. Tropoelastin, collagen and fibrillin levels were stable between days 4 and 10, and MMP and TIMP decreased by day 10. Neither UV-B (2.5-50 mJ/cm2) nor UV-A (2-12 J/cm2) altered synthesis of ECM proteins, but UV-A increased MMP-1 and -3 production. Tropoelastin synthesis increased in response to transforming growth factor-beta1 (5 ng/mL) treatment. Both interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (10 ng/mL) decreased fibrillin messenger RNA levels but increased MMP-1, -3 and -9 synthesis markedly. Collagen synthesis was not modulated by UV-B, UV-A or cytokine treatment. These results indicate that certain cytokines may have greater effects on production of ECM proteins and MMP than absorption of UV-B and UV-A by fibroblasts grown in dermal equivalents and suggest that the former pathway may play a role in the dermal remodeling in photoaged skin.<newchar><newabs>14645109<newchar>Myometrial growth and remodeling during pregnancy depends on increased synthesis of interstitial matrix proteins. We hypothesize that the presence of mechanical tension in a specific hormonal environment regulates the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in the uterus. Myometrial tissue was collected from pregnant rats on Gestational Days 0, 12, 15, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23 (labor), and 1 day postpartum and ECM expression was analyzed by Northern blotting. Expression of fibronectin, laminin beta2, and collagen IV mRNA was low during early gestation but increased dramatically on Day 23 during labor. Expression of fibrillar collagens (type I and III) peaked Day 19 and decreased near term. In contrast, elastin mRNA remained elevated from midgestation onward. Injection of progesterone (P4) on Days 20-23 (to maintain elevated plasma P4 levels) delayed the onset of labor, caused dramatic reductions in the levels of fibronectin and laminin mRNA, and prevented the fall of collagen III mRNA levels on Day 23. Treatment of pregnant rats with the progesterone receptor antagonist RU486 on Day 19 induced preterm labor on Day 20 and a premature increase in mRNA levels of collagen IV, fibronectin, and laminin. Analysis of the uterine tissue from unilaterally pregnant rats revealed that most of the changes in ECM gene expression occurred specifically in the gravid horn. Our results show a decrease in expression of fibrillar collagens and a coordinated temporal increase in expression of components of the basement membrane near term associated with decreased P4 and increased mechanical tension. These ECM changes contribute to myometrial growth and remodeling during late pregnancy and the preparation for the synchronized contractions of labor.<newchar><newabs>18293392<newchar>Muscle-fiber atrophy occurs concomitantly with intramuscular connective tissue proliferation following denervation. These events contribute to the impairment of mechanical and functional properties of denervated muscles and compromise their recovery. Electrical stimulation (ES) is used in human rehabilitation to treat denervated muscles. However, the effects of this therapy on the intramuscular extracellular matrix (ECM) remain uncertain. Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are responsible by remodeling ECM in many neuromuscular disorders. This study evaluates the effect of ES on the activity of two important MMPs, MMP-2 and MMP-9, both involved in ECM remodeling of rat denervated muscles. Thirty-four Wistar rats (3 months old, 356 +/- 38.7 g) were divided into five groups: denervated (D); D+ES; sham denervation; normal (N); and N+ES. Twenty maximal muscle contractions were stimulated every 48 h using surface electrodes, as generally used in the rehabilitation of human denervated muscle. Both zymographic analysis and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of MMPs were used to evaluate muscle after denervation for 28 days. Both the D and D+ES groups showed increased MMP-2 activity compared with the N group (P &lt; 0.05). Furthermore, only the D+ES had increased MMP-2 gene expression compared with the N group (P &lt; 0.05). MMP-9 activity was not detected in any of the groups. The results of this study indicate that denervation increases MMP-2 activity, and ES regulates MMP-2 gene expression in rat denervated skeletal muscle. These findings clarify the effects of ES on the ECM of denervated muscle and may be helpful in designing new therapeutic strategies for rehabilitation in patients with denervation of muscle.<newchar><newabs>17677505<newchar>Cytoskeletal (CSK) dynamics such as remodeling and reorganization can be studied by tracking the spontaneous motion of CSK-bound particles. Particle motion is thought to be driven by local, ATP-dependent intracellular force fluctuations due to polymerization processes and motor proteins, and to be impeded by a viscoelastic, metastable cytoskeletal network. The mechanisms that link particle motion to force fluctuations and the CSK dynamics remain unclear. We report simultaneous measurements of the spontaneous motion of CSK-bound particles and of cellular force fluctuations. Cellular force fluctuations were measured by tracking fluorescent markers embedded in an elastic polyacrylamide hydrogel substrate that served as an extracellular matrix (ECM). The motion of CSK-bound particles and markers embedded in the ECM showed both persistence and superdiffusive behavior. Moreover, the movements of CSK-bound beads were temporally and spatially correlated with force fluctuations in the ECM. The findings suggest that the spontaneous motion of CSK-bound beads is driven not by random, local stress fluctuations within a viscoelastic continuum or cage, but rather by stress fluctuations within a tensed and constantly remodeling CSK network that transmits stresses over considerable distances to the ECM.<newchar><newabs>20641396<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to study biological functions of specific targets (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (5). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infraction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (6-9). The cysteine proteases (cathepsin B, H, K, and L) and serine protease (cathepsin D) are present in the endosomal system of cells such as macrophages, epithelial cells, and tumor cells. These proteases participate in degradation of ECM and remodeling of tissues. A synthetic protected graft copolymer (PGC) consisting of poly-L-lysine (PL) with multiple methoxypolyethylene glycol (MPEG) side chains has been used as a drug carrier with efficient accumulation in tumor (10, 11). The peptide GHPGGPQKC was found to be a cathepsin K (CatK) substrate and is cleaved between Gly (G) and Gly (G) residues (12). Jaffer et al. (13) used this sequence with linking residues GHPGGPQK(Fitc)C with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to the unmodified PL side chains of the PGC to form a fluorescence-quenched polymer, Cy5.5-GHPGGPQK(Fitc)C-PL-MPEG (Cy5.5-CatK-PGC). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which results in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Gly-Gly bond is cleaved by CatK, releasing Cy5.5-containing fragments. Cy5.5 has an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). Cy5.5-CatK-PGC is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of CatK proteolytic activity in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases.<newchar><newabs>10629048<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) formation and remodeling are critical processes for proper morphogenesis, organogenesis, and tissue repair. The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) inhibits ECM accumulation by stimulating the expression of matrix proteolytic enzymes and by downregulating the deposition of structural macromolecules such as type I collagen. Stimulation of ECM degradation has been linked to prolonged activation of jun gene expression by the cytokine. Here we demonstrate that TNF-alpha inhibits transcription of the gene coding for the alpha2 chain of type I collagen [alpha2(I) collagen] in cultured fibroblasts by stimulating the synthesis and binding of repressive CCAAT/enhancer proteins (C/EBPs) to a previously identified TNF-alpha-responsive element. This conclusion was based on the concomitant identification of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta as TNF-alpha-induced factors by biochemical purification and expression library screening. It was further supported by the ability of the C/EBP-specific dominant-negative (DN) protein to block TNF-alpha inhibition of alpha2(I) collagen but not TNF-alpha stimulation of the MMP-13 protease. The DN protein also blocked TNF-alpha downregulation of the gene coding for the alpha1 chain of type I collagen. The study therefore implicates repressive C/EBPs in the TNF-alpha-induced signaling pathway that controls ECM formation and remodeling.<newchar><newabs>17673559<newchar>High mechanical loading was hypothesized to induce the expression of angiogenic and/or lymphangiogenic extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in skeletal muscle. Eight men performed a strenuous exercise protocol, which consisted of 100 unilateral maximal drop jumps followed by submaximal jumping until exhaustion. Muscle biopsies were taken 30 min and 48 h postexercise from the vastus lateralis muscle and analyzed for the following parameters: mRNA and protein expression of ECM-associated CCN proteins [cysteine-rich angiogenic protein 61 (Cyr61)/CCN1, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)/CCN2], and mRNA expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. The mRNA expression of Cyr61 and CTGF increased 30 min after the exercise (14- and 2.5-fold, respectively; P &lt; 0.001). Cyr61 remained elevated 48 h postexercise (threefold; P &lt; 0.05). The mRNA levels of VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, or hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha did not change significantly at either 30 min or 48 h postexercise; however, the variation between subjects increased markedly in VEGF-A and VEGF-B mRNA. Cyr61 protein levels were higher at both 30 min and 48 h after the exercise compared with the control (P &lt; 0.05). Cyr61 and CTGF proteins were localized to muscle fibers and the surrounding ECM by immunohistochemistry. Fast fibers stained more intensively than slow fibers. In conclusion, mechanical loading induces rapid expression of CCN proteins in human skeletal muscle. This may be one of the early mechanisms involved in skeletal muscle remodeling after exercise, since Cyr61 and CTGF regulate the expression of genes involved in angiogenesis and ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16448612<newchar>Hepatic fibrosis is a dynamic and sophisticatedly regulated wound healing response to chronic hepatocellular injury. This fibrotic process results from the accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) including collagen, proteoglycan, and adhesive glycoproteins which are principally produced by hepatic stellate cells (HSC), a mesenchymal cell type located between parenchymal cell plates and sinusoidal endothelial cells in the space of Disse. In physiological conditions, quiescent HSCs play important roles in the regulation of retinoid homeostasis and ECM remodeling by producing ECM components as well as metalloproteases and its inhibitor. However during hepatic fibrogenesis, HSCs are known to be activated or &quot;transdifferentiated&quot; to myofibroblast-like cells which play a pivotal role in ECM remodeling and hepatic blood flow regulation. Activation of HSC is now well established as the key process involved in the development of hepatic fibrosis. Both basic morphology and functions of HSCs in normal conditions and its role in pathological fibrosis will be discussed in this review.<newchar><newabs>12210832<newchar>The development of spontaneous hydrocephalus in mouse models resulting from the overexpression of transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta-1) has been previously described, although the mechanism by which this occurs remains obscure. It has been previously demonstrated that increased expression of TGFbeta has consequences for the levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their specific inhibitors (tissue inhibitors of MMPs, or TIMPs). These remodeling proteins play an important role in extracellular matrix (ECM) maintenance through degradation and deposition of ECM components. The present study investigated the relationship between elevated levels of TGFbeta-1, the ECM modulators TIMP-1 and MMP-9, and development of hydrocephalus in the neonatal mouse. In newborn pups, TIMP-1 mRNA levels were equal between animals expressing the TGFbeta-1 transgene and littermates without the transgene. However, immunohistochemistry of littermate pups shows that the distribution of TIMP-1 was changed from homogeneous with large punctate concentrations of signal to uniform, dense staining in hydrocephalic animals carrying the TGFbeta-1 transgene. The mRNA levels of MMP-9 were decreased in the transgenic animals, as were the activity levels MMP-9. These results suggest that the remodeling protein MMP-9 and its specific inhibitor, TIMP-1, may contribute to the spontaneous development of hydrocephalus in this transgenic model by altering the ECM environment.<newchar><newabs>10642310<newchar>Angiotensin II (Ang II) plays an important role in cardiac remodeling through stimulation of proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) production in cardiac fibroblasts. Integrins are a family of transmembrane receptors that mediate the attachment of cells to ECM. We hypothesized that Ang II regulation of integrins further contributes to its role in cardiac remodeling. We cultured adult rat cardiac fibroblasts with and without Ang II (100 nmol/L) to determine the effects on mRNA and protein levels of integrins, as well as alpha-actinin and other cytoskeletal proteins that link to integrins at the site of focal adhesions. Ang II was also added in the presence of irbesartan (10 micromol/L), a specific Ang II type 1 (AT(1)) receptor antagonist, or PD 123319 (10 micromol/L), a specific Ang II type 2 receptor antagonist. To investigate the function of these integrins, we determined the effects of blocking antibodies on Ang II-induced adhesion to ECM. We also treated spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) with an AT(1) receptor blocker, losartan, or with hydralazine to investigate integrin and alpha-actinin expression in treated and untreated SHR. Ang II enhanced alpha(v), beta(1), beta(3), and beta(5) integrins; osteopontin; and alpha-actinin mRNA and protein levels in cardiac fibroblasts. All of these effects were inhibited by irbesartan but not by PD 123319. Pretreatment of cardiac fibroblasts with Ang II enhanced cell attachment to ECM proteins and induced focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation. Blocking antibodies to beta(3) and alpha(v)beta(5) attenuated Ang II-induced adhesion. In SHR, ventricular alpha(v) and beta(5) integrin expression and alpha-actinin were increased compared with those in Wistar-Kyoto rats. Although both losartan and hydralazine lowered mean arterial pressure and decreased peripheral vascular resistance, only losartan attenuated the increased integrin, alpha-actinin, fibronectin laminin, and osteopontin expression and the increased left ventricular mass (as determined with echocardiography). Hydralzine had none of these effects. Although both agents attenuated beta-myosin heavy chain expression, a marker of hypertrophy, losartan had a greater effect. These results suggest that integrins and alpha-actinin are upregulated by Ang II and in left ventricular hypertrophy and that the block of expression of these proteins through inhibition of the AT(1) receptor is associated with attenuation of the hypertrophic response. Ang II induces integrin and alpha-actinin expression in cardiac fibroblasts that is associated with adhesion and left ventricular hypertrophy and blocked through inhibition of the AT(1) receptor.<newchar><newabs>21416057<newchar>Primary chronic venous disease (CVD) is an inflammatory pathology involving an erratic structural remodeling in the venous well leading to vascular incompetence and the development of varicose vein, characterized by altered collagen and elastin content. In the early steps of varicose vein formation is crucial the role of MMP/TIMP balance, implicated in both ECM and vascular degradation during inflammation processes in early and late stages of venous diseases. Although several pharmacological and surgical strategies are being utilized in the management of varicose vein and CVD with variable success and recurrence rate, inhibition of MMP through glycosaminoglycans may represent a novel therapeutic intervention to limit the progression of varicose vein to CVD and leg ulceration, suggesting possible opportunity to prevent future morbidity and enhancing clinical benefits and quality of life.<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>chronic venous disease<n-term>dermatan sulphate<n-term>fibroblast<n-term>glycosaminoglycan<n-term>inflammation<n-term>leukocyte<n-term>tissue inhibitor of MMP<n-term>varicose vein<n-term>venous ulcer<n-term><newabs>18577182<newchar>The myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM), which preserves the geometry and integrity of the myocardium, is a dynamic structure whose component proteins are maintained by a finely controlled homeostatic balance between deposition and degradation. One of the key targets in cardiology is the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms which mediate pathological remodelling of this matrix causing the transition from compensatory hypertrophy to congestive decompensated heart failure. In response to injury or increased workload, cardiac remodelling including myocyte hypertrophy, develops as the heart attempts to compensate for increased wall stresses. Persistence of these stresses over extended time periods leads to disruption of ECM homeostasis resulting in irreversible maladaptive cardiac remodelling, ventricular dilatation and finally heart failure. ECM remodelling is regulated by the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs). Clinical studies and experimental models of cardiac disease states have reported alterations in the balance between the MMPs and TIMPs in the failing heart and crucially at intermediate time points in the progression to failure. This article reviews the recent clinical, genetic and experimental approaches employed to compare ECM, MMP and TIMP profiles in healthy, compensated and failing hearts and identifies common themes in the perturbation of ECM homeostasis in the transition to heart failure.<newchar><newabs>11557576<newchar>We examined the temporal relationship between messages (type I and type III mRNAs) for the principal fibrillar procollagens and subsequent collagen accretion, cross-linking, and decorin expression in the left ventricle (LV) postmyocardial infarction (post-MI). We sought to determine 1) what role the proteoglycan decorin plays in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling known to take place as a consequence of MI and 2) the extent skeletal muscle ECM is altered early post-MI. Therefore, after surgically induced production of small- to moderate-sized infarcts (approximately 20% of LV mass), extent and time course of ECM remodeling was evaluated in remaining viable LV free wall and in slow- [soleus (SOL)] and fast-twitch [gastrocnemius (GAST)] skeletal muscles. Decorin, collagen, and hydroxylysylpyridinium cross-link concentrations and alpha1(I) (type I) and alpha1(III) (type III) procollagen mRNAs were measured in LVs from noninfarcted controls and at 72 h, 1, 2, 5, and 13 wk post-MI. These same data were collected in SOL and GAST muscles at all time points except 13 wk. Type I procollagen mRNA increased at both 72-h and 1-wk time points in LVs. Type III procollagen mRNA was elevated at 1 wk, returning to baseline by 2 wk post-MI. Collagen concentration was significantly increased by 1 wk, more than doubled by 5 wk, and was elevated 129% by 13 wk in the remaining viable LV. LV decorin expression was unaltered at early time points, but increased 38% at 5 wk post-MI and doubled by 13 wk post-MI. In skeletal muscle, procollagen mRNAs were transiently altered in SOL and GAST muscles without any demonstrable effect on the measured ECM parameters. This study reports, for the first time, the upregulation time course of decorin and its relationship to increased HP cross-linking and accumulation of collagen in viable myocardium post-MI.<newchar><newabs>21194007<newchar>Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important contributor to the invasion and metastasis of epithelial-derived cancers. While considerable effort has focused in the regulators involved in the transition process, we have focused on consequences of EMT to prosurvival signaling. Changes in distinct metastable and 'epigentically-fixed' EMT states were measured by correlation of protein, phosphoprotein, phosphopeptide and RNA transcript abundance. The assembly of 1167 modulated components into functional systems or machines simplified biological understanding and increased prediction confidence highlighting four functional groups: cell adhesion and migration, metabolism, transcription nodes and proliferation/survival networks. A coordinate metabolic reduction in a cluster of 17 free-radical stress pathway components was observed and correlated with reduced glycolytic and increased oxidative phosphorylation enzyme capacity, consistent with reduced cell cycling and reduced need for macromolecular biosynthesis in the mesenchymal state. An attenuation of EGFR autophosphorylation and a switch from autocrine to paracrine-competent EGFR signaling was implicated in the enablement of tumor cell chemotaxis. A similar attenuation of IGF1R, MET and RON signaling with EMT was observed. In contrast, EMT increased prosurvival autocrine IL11/IL6-JAK2-STAT signaling, autocrine fibronectin-integrin α5β1 activation, autocrine Axl/Tyro3/PDGFR/FGFR RTK signaling and autocrine TGFβR signaling. A relatively uniform loss of polarity and cell-cell junction linkages to actin cytoskeleton and intermediate filaments was measured at a systems level. A more heterogeneous gain of ECM remodeling and associated with invasion and migration was observed. Correlation to stem cell, EMT, invasion and metastasis datasets revealed the greatest similarity with normal and cancerous breast stem cell populations, CD49f(hi)/EpCAM(-/lo) and CD44(hi)/CD24(lo), respectively.<newchar><newabs>20711587<newchar>Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) represent an attractive option for cell replacement strategies (tissue engineering, TE). TE applications require stability of a stem cell/biomaterial-hybrid via cell migration, matrix-remodelling and differentiation. We focus on these mechanisms in organotypic culture systems for bone TE using MSC from the umbilical cord (UC-MSC) and from bone marrow (BM-MSC). For the organotypic differentiation of MSC into functional osteoblasts, MSC were embedded in a collagenous matrix and subjected to osteogenic differentiation. Under these culture conditions, UC-MSC exceeded BM-MSC in the expression and synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, while BM-MSC show enhanced osteogenic gene upregulation. In both cell types the biosynthetic activity was accompanied by the ultrastructural appearance of hydroxyapatite/calcium crystals. Following secretion of matrix metalloproteinases, both MSC types migrated into and colonised the collagenous matrix causing matrix strengthening and contraction. In conclusion, MSC promise a broad therapeutical application for a variety of connective tissues requiring ECM synthesis and remodelling.<newchar><newabs>21428880<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a large family of calcium-dependent zinc- containing endopeptidases, which are responsible for the tissue remodeling and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), including collagens, elastins, gelatin, matrix glycoproteins, and proteoglycan. The inappropriate expression of these MMPs constitutes part of the pathogenic mechanism in several diseases, therefore they are subject to inhibition. They can be inhibited by endogenous proteinase inhibitors such as 2-macroglobulin or by the family of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which are glycoproteins of molecular weight 21-30 kDa, consisting of 184-194 amino acid residues. Recently, many different classes of synthetic inhibitors have been developed in which the hydroxamic acidbased class of compounds (hydroxamates) have been most widely studied, as their hydroxamic acid group (CONHOH) enables them to act as a bidentate ligand with the zinc ion present in MMPs, leading to much stronger interaction with the receptor as compared to any other class of inhibitors. The present review describes in detail the recent development on this class of MMP inihibitors. Compounds like 12,17e, f, g and h, 45j, 45k, 50f, 62a, 63a, and 63b have been reported to be highly promising for further development.<newchar><newabs>21357991<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of proteolytic enzymes that degrade extracellular matrix (ECM), seem to have an important role in pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Released by inflammatory cells and smooth muscle cells, MMPs regulate the vascular remodeling process. The expression and activity of MMPs is regulated at the level of transcription by a variety of cytokines, proenzyme activation by several cellular and serum proteases, as well as by endogenous and exogenous inhibitors. Overproduction of MMPs could promote arteriosclerosis, leading to atherosclerotic plaque formation, and plaque rupture, resulting in clinical consequences such as myocardial infarction, or critical limb ischemia. Increased plasma levels of some MMPs are now regarded as potential biomarkers of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular risk. The potential significance of MMP inhibitors in atherosclerosis therapy is discussed.<newchar><newabs>23908791<newchar>Heparanase is an endo-β-D-glucuronidase that cleaves heparan sulfate (HS) side chains at a limited number of sites, activity that is strongly implicated with cell invasion associated with cancer metastasis, a consequence of structural modification that loosens the extracellular matrix barrier. Heparanase activity is also implicated in neovascularization, inflammation, and autoimmunity, involving migration of vascular endothelial cells and activated cells of the immune system. The cloning of a single human heparanase cDNA 10 years ago enabled researchers to critically approve the notion that HS cleavage by heparanase is required for structural remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), thereby facilitating cell invasion. Heparanase is preferentially expressed in human tumors and its over-expression in tumor cells confers an invasive phenotype in experimental animals. The enzyme also releases angiogenic factors residing in the tumor microenvironment and thereby induces an angiogenic response in vivo. Heparanase up-regulation correlates with increased tumor vascularity and poor postoperative survival of cancer patients. These observations, the anticancerous effect of heparanase gene silencing and of heparanase-inhibiting molecules, as well as the unexpected identification of a single functional heparanase suggest that the enzyme is a promising target for anticancer drug development. Progress in the field expanded the scope of heparanase function and its significance in tumor progression and other pathologies such as inflammatory bowel disease and diabetic nephropathy. Notably, while heparanase inhibitors attenuated tumor progression and metastasis in several experimental systems, other studies revealed that heparanase also functions in an enzymatic activity-independent manner. Thus, point-mutated inactive heparanase was noted to promote phosphorylation of signaling molecules such as Akt and Src, facilitating gene transcription (i.e. VEGF) and phosphorylation of selected Src substrates (i.e. EGF receptor). The concept of enzymatic activity-independent function of heparanase gained substantial support by elucidation of the heparanase C-terminus domain as the molecular determinant behind its signaling capacity and the identification of a human heparanase splice variant (T5) devoid of enzymatic activity, yet endowed with protumorigenic characteristics. Resolving the heparanase crystal structure will accelerate rational design of effective inhibitory molecules and neutralizing antibodies, paving the way for advanced clinical trials in patients with cancer and other diseases involving heparanase.<newchar>C-domain<n-term>Heparanase<n-term>angiogenesis<n-term>extracellular matrix<n-term>heparan sulfate<n-term>inflammation<n-term>matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>metastasis<n-term>myeloma<n-term>signaling<n-term><newabs>21912660<newchar>Remodeling of the extracellular matrix catalyzed by MMPs is central to morphogenetic phenomena during development and wound healing as well as in numerous pathologic conditions such as fibrosis and cancer. We have previously demonstrated that secreted MMP-2 is tethered to the cell surface and activated by MT1-MMP/TIMP-2-dependent mechanism. The resulting cell-surface collagenolytic complex (MT1-MMP)(2)/TIMP-2/MMP-2 can initiate (MT1-MMP) and complete (MMP-2) degradation of an underlying collagen fibril. The following question remained: What is the mechanism of substrate recognition involving the two structures of relatively restricted mobility, the cell surface enzymatic complex and a collagen fibril embedded in the ECM? Here we demonstrate that all the components of the complex are capable of processive movement on a surface of the collagen fibril. The mechanism of MT1-MMP movement is a biased diffusion with the bias component dependent on the proteolysis of its substrate, not adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis. It is similar to that of the MMP-1 Brownian ratchet we described earlier. In addition, both MMP-2 and MMP-9 as well as their respective complexes with TIMP-1 and -2 are capable of Brownian diffusion on the surface of native collagen fibrils without noticeable dissociation while the dimerization of MMP-9 renders the enzyme immobile. Most instructive is the finding that the inactivation of the enzymatic activity of MT1-MMP has a detectable negative effect on the cell force developed in miniaturized 3D tissue constructs. We propose that the collagenolytic complex (MT1-MMP)(2)/TIMP-2/MMP-2 represents a Mobile Cell Surface-Collagen Substratum Interface. The biological implications of MT1-MMP acting as a molecular ratchet tethered to the cell surface in complex with MMP-2 suggest a new mechanism for the role of spatially regulated peri-cellular proteolysis in cell-matrix interactions.<newchar><newabs>22132430<newchar>Ultrasound is the most widely used imaging modality (1), and its role in noninvasive molecular imaging is expanding with ligand-carrying microbubbles (MBs) (2). MBs are composed of spherical cavities filled with a gas encapsulated in a shell. The shells are made of phospholipids, surfactant, denatured human serum albumin, or synthetic polymer. Ligands and antibodies can be incorporated into the shell surface of MBs. MBs are usually 1–8 μm in diameter, and they provide a strongly reflective interface and resonate to ultrasound waves. MBs are used as ultrasound contrast agents in imaging of inflammation, angiogenesis, intravascular thrombus, and tumors (3-5). They also have the potential to be used for drug and gene delivery (6). Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (7). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (8). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (9). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (10-12). MMP expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (13). MMP2 is one of the major enzymes involved in the remodeling of the left ventricle after ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) in the heart (14). Su et al. (15) conjugated anti-MMP2 mouse monoclonal antibody sc-13595 to microbubbles containing polyethylene glycol (PEG) (MMP2-MBs) for contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging of MMP2 expression in a post-I/R remodeling rat model.<newchar><newabs>21425912<newchar>Monocytes/macrophages are a primary source of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) in the central nervous system (CNS). Macrophages infected with HIV-1 produce a plethora of factors, including matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) that may contribute to the development of HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). MMP-9 plays a pivotal role in the turnover of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and functions to remodel cellular architecture. We have investigated the role of methamphetamine and HIV-1 gp120 in the regulation of lipopolysaccaride (LPS) induced-MMP-9 production in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM). Here, we show that LPS-induced MMP-9 gene expression and protein secretion are potentiated by incubation with methamphetamine alone and gp120 alone. Further, concomitant incubation with gp120 and methamphetamine potentiated LPS-induced MMP-9 expression and biological activity in MDM. Collectively methamphetamine and gp120 effects on MMPs may modulate remodeling of the extracellular environment enhancing migration of monocytes/macrophages to the CNS.<newchar><newabs>15203551<newchar>Extracellular matrix formation (ECM) and remodeling are critical events related to the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis. Matrix metalloproteinases play an essential role in degrading and remodeling the ECM. In this study, we tried to show the presence and correlation of promatrix metalloproteinase-3 (proMMP-3) (the inactive form of metalloproteinase-3) levels in coal workers' pneumoconiosis (CWP) with different categories. The study population consisted of 44 coal miners with CWP (pos CWP). Coal miners without CWP (neg CWP, n = 24) and non-underground personnel (controls, n = 17) were taken as controls. All coal miners were stable and had no systemic infection or disease. Standard posterio-anterior chest radiographs and pulmonary function tests were performed to exclude any diseases other than CWP. Serum proMMP-3 was analysed using the sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay according to the manufacturer's instructions (The Binding Site, Birmingham, UK). Mean proMMP-3 values of the all three groups were compared and a significant statistical difference obtained (p &lt; 0.001). In addition, a statistically significant difference was found between categories of the disease and proMMP-3 values (p &lt; 0.05). The effects of age, exposure duration and cigarette smoking on proMMP-3 values in coal miners with CWP were investigated. There were no correlations between age, smoking and proMMP-3 values. However, a positive correlation was found between exposure duration and proMMP-3 values (r = 0.447, p = 0.008). In conclusion, proMMP-3 (prostromelysin 1) may play an essential role in degrading and remodeling the ECM in workers with pneumoconiosis. ProMMP-3 may also reflect the stage of pneumoconiosis disease.<newchar><newabs>21173247<newchar>Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have increased numbers of human tryptase-β (hTryptase-β)-positive mast cells (MCs) in the gastrointestinal tract. The amino acid sequence of mouse mast cell protease (mMCP)-6 is most similar to that of hTryptase-β. We therefore hypothesized that this mMCP, or the related tryptase mMCP-7, might have a prominent proinflammatory role in experimental colitis. The dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) and trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) colitis models were used to evaluate the differences between C57BL/6 (B6) mouse lines that differ in their expression of mMCP-6 and mMCP-7 with regard to weight loss, colon histopathology, and endoscopy scores. Microarray analyses were performed, and confirmatory real-time PCR, ELISA, and/or immunohistochemical analyses were carried out on a number of differentially expressed cytokines, chemokines, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The mMCP-6-null mice that had been exposed to DSS had significantly less weight loss as well as significantly lower pathology and endoscopy scores than similarly treated mMCP-6-expressing mice. This difference in colitis severity was confirmed endoscopically in the TNBS-treated mice. Evaluation of the distal colon segments revealed that numerous proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines that preferentially attract neutrophils, and MMPs that participate in the remodeling of the ECM were all markedly increased in the colons of DSS-treated WT mice relative to untreated WT mice and DSS-treated mMCP-6-null mice. Collectively, our data show that mMCP-6 (but not mMCP-7) is an essential MC-restricted mediator in chemically induced colitis and that this tryptase acts upstream of many of the factors implicated in IBD.<newchar><newabs>10525421<newchar>Different patterns of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in the heart are thought to be dependent on altered mechanical and chemical conditions and can contribute to cardiac dysfunction. Cardiac fibroblasts are the primary regulators of the ECM and may respond to mechanical factors in vitro. We hypothesized that different types of in vitro strains, e.g. tensile or compressive, can stimulate different functional responses in cultured adult rat cardiac fibroblasts. In this study, we first showed that a single step in strain applied by a uniaxial stretch system stimulated collagen III and fibronectin mRNA levels and transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) activity in the adult phenotype of rat cardiac fibroblasts. Two-dimensional deformations were measured by tracking fluorescent microspheres attached to the substrate and cultured cells. For 10% uniaxial strain, mean principal strains were 0. 104 +/- 0.018 in the direction of stretch and -0.042 +/- 0.013 in the perpendicular direction, verifying that the fibroblasts were simultaneously subjected to tensile (positive) and compressive (negative) strains. Furthermore, these cells were also subjected to area change and to shear. In order to examine the distinct effects of different types of deformation on cardiac fibroblasts, an equibiaxial stretch system was used to apply either pure tensile or compressive area strains, in the absence of shear. Magnitudes of equibiaxial strain were selected to apply local cell area changes identical to those applied in the uniaxial system. Results showed that pure tensile and compressive area strains induced divergent responses in ECM mRNA levels. TGF-beta(1) activity was dependent on the magnitude of applied area strain regardless of the mode of deformation. These findings demonstrate that adult cardiac fibroblasts may respond differently to varied types of mechanical loading, suggesting that ECM remodeling may be locally regulated by specific mechanical stimuli in the heart.<newchar><newabs>21886777<newchar>Fluid flow through large interstitial spaces is sensed at the cellular level, and mechanistic responses to flow changes enables expansion or contraction of the cells modulating the surrounding area and brings about changes in fluid flow. In the anterior eye chamber, aqueous humor, a clear fluid, flows through trabecular meshwork (TM), a filter like region. Cochlin, a secreted protein in the extracellular matrix, was identified in the TM of glaucomatous patients but not controls by mass spectrometry. Cochlin undergoes shear induced multimerization and plays a role in mechanosensing of fluid shear. Cytoskeletal changes in response to mechanosensing in the ECM by cochlin will necessitate transduction of mechanosensing. TREK-1, a stretch activated outward rectifying potassium channel protein known to act as mechanotransducer was found to be expressed in TM. Cochlin expression results in co-expression of TREK-1 and filopodia formation. Prolonged cochlin expression results in expression and subsequent secretion of annexin A2, a protein known to play a role in cytoskeletal remodeling. Cochlin interacts with TREK-1 and annexin A2. Cochlin-TREK-1 interaction has functional consequences and results in changes in cell shape and motility. Annexin A2 expression and secretion follows cochlin-TREK-1 syn-expression and correlates with cell elongation. Thus cytoskeleton changes in response to fluid shear sensed by cochlin are further mediated by TREK-1 and annexin A2.<newchar><newabs>11999439<newchar>Remodeling of uterine endometrial extracellular matrix (ECM) is pivotal to successful implantation and placentation, and has been well described in the rodents and humans. However, bovine endometrial ECM remodeling is still vaguely defined, especially at the time of implantation. Therefore, this study investigated the distribution of four ECMs namely, types I and IV collagen, laminin and fibronectin, from days 0 to 30 of gestation in bovine endometrium by immunofluorescence microscopy. A change in the distribution pattern of ECMs was evident by day 14 of gestation as features at this stage were clearly different from those of day 14 of the estrous cycle. The immunoreactivity of type I collagen, fibronectin and laminin decreased from day 14 of gestation and was obscured by day 24 of gestation. The type I collagen fibers formed were of thinner consistency than those of the estrous cycle and showed a coarser meshwork within the epithelium sites during the implantation period. In addition, the type IV collagen and laminin immunoreactivities of epithelial basement membrane also remarkably declined at exactly the same time. By day 30 of gestation, the four ECMs had regenerated with the formation of the placentome. In conclusion, this study reveals that remodeling of ECM is essential for the successful establishment of pregnancy in the bovine.<newchar><newabs>10190275<newchar>Embryonic development and tumor progression both require the exquisite coordination of programs for extracellular matrix (ECM) formation and remodeling, and those for angiogenesis and vascular development. Without a vascular supply the normal tissue or tumor is limited in size and organization. Without ECM remodeling the alteration of tissue and tumor boundaries and cellular migrations are limited. Recent insights into the molecular mechanisms regulating the extracellular environment of the growing embryonic tissue or tumors have implicated proteases, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in particular, in both the process of ECM remodeling and angiogenesis, and in a potential causal relationship between these processes. This review focuses on the roles that MMPs play in regulating three processes in which both proteolysis and vascular development are tightly coordinated: embryo implantation, bone development and tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>19575173<newchar>Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare disorder predominantly affecting the skin, the eyes, and the cardiovascular system. The disease is caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene and characterized by ectopic calcification and extracellular matrix (ECM) alterations. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in the process of ECM remodeling. In the present study, we investigated matrix metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9 in PXE patients compared to healthy controls. We analyzed the serum concentrations of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in a cohort of 69 German PXE patients and in 69 healthy, age-, and sex-matched control subjects using commercially available ELISA assays. We found elevated concentrations of both MMPs in the sera of PXE patients. MMP-2 levels were significantly higher in patients than controls (231 +/- 5.89 vs 202 +/- 5.17 ng/ml, p = 0.0002), as were MMP-9 levels (841 +/- 65.9 vs 350 +/- 30.8 ng/ml, p &lt; 0.0001). Our findings point to an involvement of matrix metalloproteinases in PXE pathology. ECM remodeling in PXE is reflected by elevated levels of circulating MMP-2 and MMP-9. Those MMPs might, therefore, be applicable as serum markers for the matrix-degradative process in PXE.<newchar><newabs>22299066<newchar>Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein and is the most common life-limiting genetic condition affecting the Caucasian population. It is an autosomal recessive, monogenic inherited disorder characterized by failure of airway host defense against bacterial infection, which results in bronchiectasis, the breakdown of airway wall extracellular matrix (ECM). In this study, we show that the in vitro models consisting of human tracheo-bronchial-epithelial (hBE) cells grown on porous supports with embedded magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) at an air-liquid interface are suitable for long term, non-invasive assessment of ECM remodeling using magnetomotive optical coherence elastography (MMOCE). The morphology of ex vivo CF and normal lung tissues using OCT and correlative study with histology is also examined. We also demonstrate a quantitative measure of normal and CF airway elasticity using MMOCE. The improved understanding of pathologic changes in CF lung structure and function and the novel method of longitudinal in vitro ECM assessment demonstrated in this study may lead to new in vivo imaging and elastography methods to monitor disease progression and treatment in cystic fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>17524477<newchar>Biologic scaffolds composed of naturally occurring extracellular matrix (ECM) have received significant attention for their potential therapeutic applications. The full potential of the ability of ECM scaffolds to promote constructive remodeling will not be realized, however, until an understanding of the biology and the external influences that affect biology, are better achieved. The factors that appear important for the constructive remodeling of ECM biologic scaffolds are its ability to be rapidly and completely degraded with the generation of downstream bioactive molecules, the bioinductive properties of the functional molecules that compose native ECM material and the ability to engineer its mechanical properties at the time of implantation through an understanding of its collagen fiber microstructure.<newchar><newabs>17354089<newchar>This review focuses specifically on matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their role in physiological and pathological extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and degradation processes in the oral environment. A group of enzymes capable of degrading almost all ECM proteins, MMPs contribute to both normal and pathological tissue remodeling. The expression of different MMPs may be upregulated in pathological conditions such as inflammation and tumor invasion. The balance between activated MMPs and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) controls the extent of ECM remodeling. Prior to mineralization, MMPs may participate in the organization of enamel and dentin organic matrix, or they may regulate mineralization by controlling the proteoglycan turnover. There is evidence indicating that MMPs could be involved in the etiology of enamel fluorosis and amelogenesis imperfecta. They seem to play a part in dentinal caries progression, since they have a crucial role in dentin collagen breakdown in caries lesions. MMPs have been identified in pulpal and periapical inflammation and are strongly correlated with periodontal diseases, since they are the major players in collagen breakdown during periodontal tissue destruction. The use of MMP inhibitors could help the prevention and treatment of many MMP-related oral diseases.<newchar><newabs>15753370<newchar>Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor in children. Osteosarcoma patients who respond poorly to chemotherapy are at a higher risk of relapse and adverse outcome. Therefore, it was the aim of this study to identify prognostic factors at the time of diagnosis to characterize the genes predictive of poor survival outcome and to identify potential novel therapeutic targets. Expression profiling of 30 osteosarcoma diagnostic biopsy samples, 15 with inferior necrosis following induction chemotherapy (Huvos I/II) and 15 with superior necrosis following induction chemotherapy (Huvos III/IV), was conducted using Affymetrix U95Av2 oligonucleotide microarrays. One hundred and four genes were found to be statistically significant and highly differentially expressed between Huvos I/II and III/IV patients. Statistically significant genes were validated on a small independent cohort comprised of osteosarcoma xenograft tumor samples. Markers of Huvos I/II response predominantly were gene products involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) microenvironment remodeling and osteoclast differentiation. A striking finding was the significant decrease in osteoprotegerin, an osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor. Additional genes involved in osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption, which were statistically different, include annexin 2, SMAD, PLA2G2A, and TGFbeta1. ECM remodeling genes include desmoplakin, SPARCL1, biglycan, and PECAM. Gene expression of select genes involved in tumor progression, ECM remodeling, and osteoclastogenesis were validated via quantitative reverse transcription-PCR in an independent cohort. We propose that osteosarcoma tumor-driven changes in the bone microenvironment contribute to the chemotherapy-resistant phenotype and offer testable hypotheses to potentially enhance therapeutic response.<newchar><newabs>19607804<newchar>The transcription regulator CITED2 (CBP/p300-Interacting-Transactivator-with-ED-rich-tail-2) is known to suppress genes mediating angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. However, it is unclear whether CITED2 has a role in controlling skeletal repair or remodeling. We tested the hypothesis that CITED2 functions in bone fracture healing by suppressing the expression of genes critical to ECM remodeling, angiogenesis and osteogenesis, importantly the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Three hours following mandibular osteotomy or sham surgery of adult rats, osteotomy fronts were harvested and the expression of CITED2 and genes associated with fracture healing was ascertained by quantitative PCR. In parallel, gain-of-function studies examined the effect of overexpressing CITED2 on the expression and activity of several MMPs. In the fractured mandible, CITED2 expression was inversely related to the expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -13, VEGF, HIF-1alpha, M-CSF, RANK-L, and OPG. Consistent with this, the over-expression of CITED2 in osteoblasts inhibited the expression and activity of MMP-2, -3, -9, and -13. Taken together, the studies suggest that CITED2 is a critical upstream regulator of fracture healing. The suppression of CITED2 early after fracture may allow an optimal initiation of the healing response.<newchar><newabs>19798596<newchar>Adipogenesis, a key step in the pathogenesis of obesity, involves extensive ECM remodeling, changes in cell-ECM interactions, and cytoskeletal rearrangement. Matricellular proteins regulate cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions. Evidence in vivo and in vitro indicates that the prototypic matricellular protein, SPARC, inhibits adipogenesis and promotes osteoblastogenesis. Herein we discuss mechanisms underlying the inhibitory effect of SPARC on adipogenesis. SPARC enhances the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and regulates the expression and posttranslational modification of collagen. SPARC might drive preadipocytes away from the status of growth arrest and therefore prevent terminal differentiation. SPARC could also decrease WAT deposition through its negative effects on angiogenesis. Therefore, several stages of white adipose tissue accumulation are sensitive to the inhibitory effects of SPARC.<newchar><newabs>19128858<newchar>Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of large white matter hyperintensities (LWMH), decreased brain volume and silent cerebral infarcts (SCI) are subclinical indices of brain ischemia and aging. Although the pathophysiology of these findings remains uncertain, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, a process regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs), may be implicated. We evaluated the cross-sectional relations of circulating MMP-9 and TIMP-1 to these MRI indices in 583 stroke and dementia-free, Framingham Offspring participants (mean age 57 years, 58% women). Using multivariable regression MMP-9 (detectable versus non-detectable) and TIMP-1 (modeled as sex-specific quartiles) were related to LWMH (&gt;1S.D. above age-specific mean; yes/no), SCI (yes/no) and total brain volume (ratio of parenchymal to intracranial volume, TCBVr). Mean TCBVr was 0.78 (S.D. 0.03), 13% of subjects had LWMH and 12% had SCI. Detectable MMP-9 was associated with higher prevalence of LWMH (OR 2.09, 95%confidence interval (CI) 1.00-4.37), but not with TCBVr. TIMP-1 was associated with a high prevalence of LWMH (OR for Q4 versus Q1-3: 1.83, 95%CI 1.06-3.18) and with lower mean TCBVr (Q4 associated with 0.17 S.D. units lower value relative to Q1-3; p=0.04). Neither biomarker was associated with SCI. Our findings are preliminary but if confirmed in further studies, suggest a pathophysiological role for the MMP/TIMP pathway in processes of brain ischemia and aging.<newchar><newabs>19346269<newchar>Clenbuterol has recently been shown to reverse pathologic cardiac remodeling during left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support, leading to restored ventricular function and explantation of LVAD devices. However, others have not been able to support these observations. Our hypothesis is that the beta(2)-adrenergic activity of clenbuterol induces cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, resulting in increased interstitial fibrillar collagen content and altered diastolic function that may account for these conflicting reports. The intent of this study is to characterize the effect of clenbuterol on healthy murine hearts with transthoracic echo and histology. C57BL/6 female mice were administered 2.4 microg/kg/day of clenbuterol in the drinking water for 7 days and analysis conducted on day 8-24 hours after the last dose of clenbuterol. Histological analysis demonstrated an increase in left ventricular ECM collagen content in a control group compared with the clenbuterol group (density 0.32 +/- 0.16 compared to 2.01 +/- 0.30 RD/mm(2)). The ventricular fibrosis was supported by altered diastolic function measured by transthoracic echo where there was a significant increase in isovolumic relaxation time, and left atrial dimension and a decrease in left ventricular free wall tissue Doppler ratios. Our study showed no significant differences in left ventricular ejection fraction, cardiac output, or heart rate between the clenbuterol and control groups. These data suggest that the beta-2 adrenergic activity of clenbuterol increases ECM fibrillar collagen concentrations in normal hearts, resulting in altered diastolic function.<newchar><newabs>20529817<newchar>Both idiopathic IgA nephropathy (IgAN) and Schoenlein-Henoch nephritis (SHN) are characterized by cell proliferation and abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by mesangial cells leading to fibrosis, sclerosis and end-stage renal disease. Matrix metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9 are reported as the most important proteolytic enzymes involved in remodeling of ECM. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to determine glomerular immunoexpression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in IgAN and SHN. Another purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between expression of MMPs and mesangial cells, a-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) staining, and monocytes/macrophages. Fifteen patients with idiopathic IgAN and 12 with SHN were examined by percutaneous renal biopsy. Glomerular staining intensity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was recorded semiquantitatively, whereas mesangial cells, glomerular alpha-SMA staining and glomerular CD 68+ cells were assessed quantitatively using computer image analysis system. Our study revealed that the mean values of glomerular immunoexpression of MMP-2, mesangial cells, alpha-SMA staining and glomerular CD 68+ cells were in SHN patients significantly increased as compared to IgAN cases whereas glomerular staining for MMP-9 did not differ in these groups. Moreover, a glomerular staining of MMP-2 was significantly positively correlated with mesangial cells as well as glomerular alpha-SMA staining in both SHN and IgAN. A positive significant correlation between glomerular MMP-2 staining and glomerular CD68+ cells was noted only in SHN group. The correlations of glomerular MMP-9 and these parameters were weak and not significant. In conclusion, our results confirm increased glomerular staining of MMP-2 but not MMP-9 in SHN patients. A suggestion that augmented mesangial cells proliferation in these cases depends on MMP-2, alpha-SMA and monocytes/macrophages needs further investigations including double staining study.<newchar><newabs>11882630<newchar>In deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA)-salt hypertension, the endothelin-1 system is activated and plays a role in cardiac fibrosis. Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) may lead to interstitial fibrosis, which may contribute to heart failure. Imbalance in synthesis and degradation of the ECM by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) as well as inflammation may play a role in matrix protein deposition and cardiac remodeling in hypertension. We measured expression of the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin, the activity of the gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, the proinflammatory transcription factor NFkappaB, and the adhesion molecules, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 and platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM)-1 in hearts of DOCA-salt hypertensive (DS) rats treated or not with the endothelin ET(A) antagonist BMS 182874 (BMS). Unilaterally nephrectomized rats (UniNx) were compared with DS rats treated or not with BMS 40 mg/kg/d. Fibronectin deposition was detectable at the first week, and remained elevated thereafter. This increase was abrogated by administration of the ET(A) antagonist. Enzymatic activity of gelatinases was increased (P&lt;0.01) in DS compared with control during the first and second week. BMS blocked the increase of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity at week 1 (P&lt;0.05); MMP activity remained lower than in DS at week 2. NF-kappaB binding activity in DS was higher (P&lt;0.05) than it was in controls during the second week, and was reduced by BMS. The adhesion molecules VCAM-1 and PECAM-1, and the antiapoptotic molecule xIAP were upregulated in the left ventricle of the heart of DS rats and downregulated in the rats treated with the ET(A) antagonist. In conclusion, cardiac extracellular remodeling in rats with endothelin-dependent hypertension was associated with increased fibronectin, MMP activity, and upregulation of inflammatory mediators, all of which were reduced by ET(A) antagonism.<newchar><newabs>17043917<newchar>Orthodontic tooth movement progresses by a combination of periodontal ligament (PDL) tissue and alveolar bone remodeling processes. Besides the remodeling of alveolar bone around the moving teeth, the major extracellular matrix (ECM) components of PDLs, collagens, are degenerated, degraded, and restructured. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their specific inhibitors, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), act in a co-ordinated fashion to regulate the remodeling of periodontal tissues. We hypothesized that the expression levels of the genes for MMP-2, MMP-9, and TIMPs 1-3 are increased transiently in the periodontal tissue during orthodontic tooth movement. To test this hypothesis, we employed an animal model of tooth movement using rats, as well as in situ hybridization to analyze the expression levels of Mmp-2, Mmp-9, and Timps 1-3. The expression levels of these genes increased transiently in cells of periodontal tissues, which include cementoblasts, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts, at the compression side of the moving teeth. The transient increases in gene expression at the tension side were mainly limited to osteoblasts and cementoblasts. In conclusion, the expression levels of Mmp-2, Mmp-9, and Timps 1-3 increase transiently during orthodontic tooth movement at both the tension and compression sides. The expression of these genes is regulated differentially in the periodontal tissue of the tension side and compression side. This altered pattern of gene expression may determine the rate and extent of remodeling of the collagenous ECM in periodontal tissues during orthodontic tooth movement.<newchar><newabs>18495691<newchar>The IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor (IGF2R) function in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is known to occur as a result of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activation and plasmin in the proteolytic cleavage level caused by the interaction between latent TGF-beta and urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) respectively. In one of our previous studies, we found IGF-II and IGF2R dose-dependently correlated with the progression of pathological hypertrophy remodeling following complete abdominal aorta ligation. However, how this IGF2R signaling pathway responds specifically to IGF-II and regulates the myocardial ECM remodeling process is unclear. We found that IGF2R was aberrantly expressed in myocardial infarction scars. The matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) zymographic activity was elevated in H9c2 cardiomyoblast cells treated with IGF-II, but not IGF-I. Treatment with Leu27IGF-II, an IGF2R specifically binding IGF-II analog, resulted in significant time-dependent increases in the MMP-9, tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA), and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA); and a reduction in the tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2) protein expression. Furthermore, IGF2R expression inhibition by siRNA blocked the IGF-II-induced MMP-9 activity. We hypothesize that after IGF-II is bound with IGF2R, the resulting signal disrupts the balance in the MMP-9/TIMP-2 expression level and increases plasminogen activator (PAs) expression involved in the development of myocardial remodeling. If so, IGF2R signaling inhibition may have potential use in the development of therapies preventing heart fibrosis progression.<newchar><newabs>17987127<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is important during bone development and repair. Because matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13, collagenase-3) plays a role in long bone development, we have examined its role during adult skeletal repair. In this study we find that MMP13 is expressed by hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteoblasts in the fracture callus. We demonstrate that MMP13 is required for proper resorption of hypertrophic cartilage and for normal bone remodeling during non-stabilized fracture healing, which occurs via endochondral ossification. However, no difference in callus strength was detected in the absence of MMP13. Transplant of wild-type bone marrow, which reconstitutes cells only of the hematopoietic lineage, did not rescue the endochondral repair defect, indicating that impaired healing in Mmp13-/- mice is intrinsic to cartilage and bone. Mmp13-/- mice also exhibited altered bone remodeling during healing of stabilized fractures and cortical defects via intramembranous ossification. This indicates that the bone phenotype occurs independently from the cartilage phenotype. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that MMP13 is involved in normal remodeling of bone and cartilage during adult skeletal repair, and that MMP13 may act directly in the initial stages of ECM degradation in these tissues prior to invasion of blood vessels and osteoclasts.<newchar><newabs>20641377<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). The splice variant v6 of the cell membrane glycoprotein CD44 (CD44v6) is expressed in only a few normal epithelial tissues (e.g., thyroid and prostate gland). CD44 binds to ECM and is associated with cell adhesion, lymphocyte activation, and tumor cell metastasis (4, 5). Elevated levels of CD44v6 have been found in epithelial tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (5). U36, an anti-CD44v6 chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody (cMAb), was found not bind to follicles or C cells from normal human thyroid (6). CD44v6 is generally highly expressed in thyroid carcinoma (7). (124)I-cMAb U36 was developed for imaging of CD44v6 expression in thyroid carcinomas and other epithelial tumors (8, 9).<newchar><newabs>19798595<newchar>Interactions between the extracellular matrix (ECM) and cells are critical in embryonic development, tissue homeostasis, physiological remodeling, and tumorigenesis. Matricellular proteins, a group of ECM components, mediate cell-ECM interactions. One such molecule, Fibulin-5 is a 66-kDa glycoprotein secreted by various cell types, including vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs), fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. Fibulin-5 contributes to the formation of elastic fibers by binding to structural components including tropoelastin and fibrillin-1, and to cross-linking enzymes, aiding elastic fiber assembly. Mice deficient in the fibulin-5 gene (Fbln5) exhibit systemic elastic fiber defects with manifestations of loose skin, tortuous aorta, emphysematous lung and genital prolapse. Although Fbln5 expression is down-regulated after birth, following the completion of elastic fiber formation, expression is reactivated upon tissue injury, affecting diverse cellular functions independent of its elastogenic function. Fibulin-5 contains an evolutionally conserved arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) motif in the N-terminal region, which mediates binding to a subset of integrins, including alpha5beta1, alphavbeta3, and alphavbeta5. Fibulin-5 enhances substrate attachment of endothelial cells, while inhibiting migration and proliferation in a cell type- and context-dependent manner. The antagonistic function of fibulin-5 in angiogenesis has been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo; fibulin-5 may block angiogenesis by inducing the anti-angiogenic molecule thrompospondin-1, by antagonizing VEGF(165)-mediated signaling, and/or by antagonizing fibronectin-mediated signaling through directly binding and blocking the alpha5beta1 fibronectin receptor. The overall effect of fibulin-5 on tumor growth depends on the balance between the inhibitory property of fibulin-5 on angiogenesis and the direct effect of fibulin-5 on proliferation and migration of tumor cells. However, the effect of tumor-derived versus host microenvironment-derived fibulin-5 remains to be evaluated.<newchar><newabs>18059623<newchar>Mechanical forces are important for connective tissue homeostasis. How do fibroblasts sense mechanical stress and how do they translate this information into an adaptive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM)? Tenascin-C is rapidly induced in vivo by loading muscles and in vitro by stretching fibroblasts. Regulation of tenascin-C expression by mechanical signals occurs at the transcriptional level. Integrin receptors physically link the ECM to the cytoskeleton and act as force transducers: intracellular signals are triggered when integrins engage with ECM, and later when forces are applied. We found that cyclic strain does not induce tenascin-C messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) in fibroblasts lacking the beta1-integrin chain. An important link in integrin-dependent mechanotransduction is the small guanosine 5'-triphosphatase. RhoA and its target kinase, ROCK. In fibroblasts, cyclic strain activates RhoA and thereby induces ROCK-dependent actin assembly. Interestingly, tenascin-C mRNA induction by cyclic strain was suppressed by relaxing the cytoskeleton with a ROCK inhibitor or by actin depolymerization. Conversely, chemical activators of RhoA enhanced the effect of strain both on actin dynamics and on tenascin-C expression. Thus, RhoA/ROCK-controlled actin dynamics are required for the induction of specific ECM genes by mechanical stress. These findings have implications for the understanding of regeneration and for tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>19633290<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13, or collagenase 3) has been shown to degrade intact collagen and to participate in situations where rapid and effective remodeling of collagenous ECM is required. Mechanical strain induction of MMP-13 is an example of how osteoblasts respond to high mechanical forces and participate in the bone-remodeling mechanism. Using MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cells, we dissected the signaling molecules involved in MMP-13 induction by mechanical strain. Reverse transcription-PCR and zymogram analysis showed that platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) inhibitor, AG1296, inhibited the mechanical strain-induced MMP-13 gene and activity. However, the induction was not affected by anti-PDGF-AA serum. Immunoblot analysis revealed time-dependent phosphorylation of PDGFR-alpha up to 2.7-fold increases within 3 min under strain. Transfection with shPDGFR-alpha (at 4 and 8 microg/ml) abolished PDGFR-alpha and reduced MMP-13 expression. Moreover, time-dependent recruitments of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) by PDGFR-alpha were detected by immunoprecipitation with anti-PDGFR-alpha serum followed by immunoblot with anti-PI3K serum. AG1296 inhibited PDGFR-alpha/PI3K aggregation and Akt phosphorylation. Interestingly, protein kinase C-delta (PKC-delta) inhibitor, rottlerin, inhibited not only PDGFR-alpha/PI3K aggregation but PDGFR-alpha phosphorylation. The sequential activations were further confirmed by mutants DeltaPKC-delta, DeltaAkt, and DeltaERK1. Consistently, the primary mouse osteoblast cells used the same identified signaling molecules to express MMP-13 under mechanical strain. These results demonstrate that, in osteoblast-like cells, the MMP-13 induction by mechanical strain requires the transactivation of PDGFR-alpha by PKC-delta and the cross-talk between PDGFR-alpha/PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK pathways.<newchar><newabs>18455130<newchar>Lumbar-disc herniation (LDH), one of the most common musculoskeletal diseases, has strong genetic determinants. Recently, several genes that encode extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in the intervertebral disc have been reported to associate with LDH. Thrombospondins (THBSs) 1 and 2 are good candidates for the LDH susceptibility gene: They are intervertebral disc ECM proteins that regulate the effective levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 2 and 9, which are key effectors of ECM remodeling. Here, we report that THBS2 is associated with LDH in Japanese populations. An intronic SNP in THBS2 (IVS10-8C --&gt; T; rs9406328) showed significant association (p = 0.0000028) with LDH in two independent Japanese populations. This SNP, located in a polypyrimidine tract upstream of the 3' splice site of intron 10, exerts allelic differences on exon 11 skipping rates in vivo, with the susceptibility allele showing increased skipping. Skipping of exon 11 results in decreased THBS2 interaction with MMP2 and MMP9. Further, a missense SNP in MMP9 (Q279R; rs17576) is also strongly associated with LDH in the Japanese population (p = 0.00049) and shows a combinatorial effect with THBS2 (odds ratio 3.03, 95% confidence interval 1.58-5.77). Thus, a splicing-affecting SNP in THBS2 and a missense SNP in MMP9 are associated with susceptibility to LDH. Our data indicate that regulation of intervertebral disc ECM metabolism by the THBS2-MMP system plays an essential role in the etiology and pathogenesis of LDH.<newchar><newabs>19224576<newchar>The formation of the myelin sheath is a crucial step during development because it enables fast and efficient propagation of signals within the limited space of the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). During the process of myelination, oligodendrocytes actively interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM). These interactions are considered crucial for proper and timely completion of the myelin sheath. However, the exact regulatory circuits involved in the signaling events that occur between the ECM and oligodendrocytes are currently not fully understood. Therefore, in the present study we investigated the role of a known integrator of cell-ECM signaling, namely, focal adhesion kinase (FAK), in CNS myelination via the use of conditional (oligodendrocyte-specific) and inducible FAK-knockout mice (Fak(flox/flox): PLP/CreER(T) mice). When inducing FAK knockout just prior to and during active myelination of the optic nerve, we observed a significant reduction in the number of myelinated fibers on postnatal day 14. In addition, our data revealed a decreased number of primary processes extending from oligodendrocyte cell bodies at this postnatal age and on induction of FAK knockout. In contrast, myelination appeared normal on postnatal day 28. Thus, our data suggest that FAK controls the efficiency and timing of CNS myelination during its initial stages, at least in part, by regulating oligodendrocyte process outgrowth and/or remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16321879<newchar>The morphogenesis of the cerebellar cortex depends on intrinsic genetic programs as well as orchestrated cell-cell/cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family comprises of more than 20 members that catalyze the degradation of all the protein constituents of the ECM. These proteolytic endopeptidases mediate cell-cell/cell-ECM interactions by remodeling the ECM and modulating the activity of membrane-associated receptors. The activity of MMPs is negatively controlled by the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). The MMPs and TIMPs regulate diverse neuronal functions including migration, process extension and synaptic plasticity. MMP-2, -3, -9, membrane type 5-MMP (MT5-MMP), TIMP-1, -2 and -3 are expressed in the developing cerebellum. The spatiotemporal pattern of expression/activity of these enzymes suggests that they play a role in the development of the cerebellar cortex. Blockage of MMP-2/-9 activity by specific inhibitors or blocking antibody, as well as using MMP-9 knock-out mice, clearly establishes that MMP-2/-9 participates in the regulation of morphogenesis of the cerebellum. The potential contributions of these enzymes to granule neuron migration, Purkinje cell dendritogenesis and synaptogenesis are discussed.<newchar><newabs>17292415<newchar>Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) are a rare but potentially devastating condition. Current surgical treatment of TAAs usually involves a major operation, which conveys many risks to the patient. Better knowledge of the cellular events that lead to aneurysm formation may elucidate less morbid treatment options for this condition. A number of recent studies have identified that the relative abundance and activity of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteolytic systems are increased with TAAs. Specifically, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been linked through numerous studies to TAA formation. MMPs comprise a family of ECM-degrading proteinases. Endogenous tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) normally regulate MMP activity, and the activation of MMPs is complex and tightly controlled. Aneurysm formation may be related to relative changes in the balance between MMP/TIMP abundance favoring proteolysis. Through ECM degradation, the medial layer will undergo structural remodeling and a loss of structural integrity, leading to TAA formation. The goals of this review are to examine the structure of the normal and aneurysmal thoracic aorta and to place the new findings regarding ECM proteolysis in perspective with regard to TAA formation and progression. Through an integration of basic and clinical studies regarding the underlying molecular basis for proteolysis of the thoracic aorta, improved diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies for this disease process are likely to be realized.<newchar><newabs>20199390<newchar>In the context of OA disease, NF-kappaB transcription factors can be triggered by a host of stress-related stimuli including pro-inflammatory cytokines, excessive mechanical stress and ECM degradation products. Activated NF-kappaB regulates the expression of many cytokines and chemokines, adhesion molecules, inflammatory mediators, and several matrix degrading enzymes. NF-kappaB also influences the regulated accumulation and remodeling of ECM proteins and has indirect positive effects on downstream regulators of terminal chondrocyte differentiation (including beta-catenin and Runx2). Although driven partly by pro-inflammatory and stress-related factors, OA pathogenesis also involves a &quot;loss of maturational arrest&quot; that inappropriately pushes chondrocytes towards a more differentiated, hypertrophic-like state. Growing evidence points to NF-kappaB signaling as not only playing a central role in the pro-inflammatory stress-related responses of chondrocytes to extra- and intra-cellular insults, but also in the control of their differentiation program. Thus unlike other signaling pathways the NF-kappaB activating kinases are potential therapeutic OA targets for multiple reasons. Targeted strategies to prevent unwanted NF-kappaB activation in this context, which do not cause side effects on other proteins or signaling pathways, need to be focused on the use of highly specific drug modalities, siRNAs or other biological inhibitors that are targeted to the activating NF-kappaB kinases IKKalpha or IKKbeta or specific activating canonical NF-kappaB subunits. However, work remains in its infancy to evaluate the effects of efficacious, targeted NF-kappaB inhibitors in animal models of OA disease in vivo and to also target these strategies only to affected cartilage and joints to avoid other undesirable systemic effects.<newchar><newabs>16368516<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in the pathogenesis of several diseases of the CNS, that share common pathophysiological processes, such as blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption, oxidative stress, remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and inflammation. In ischemic brain injury, MMPs are implicated in various stages of the disease. Early after the onset of ischemia, MMPs contribute to the disruption of the BBB leading to vasogenic edema and to the influx of leucocytes into the CNS. The ability of MMPs to digest the basal lamina of capillaries increases the risk of hemorrhagic transformation of the ischemic tissue. During the acute ischemic phase, maintenance of the ECM is essential for neuronal survival. However, ECM degradation and its reconstitution are critical to tissue recovery. MMPs as a key modulator of ECM homeostasis play a role in the cascades leading to neuronal cell death and tissue regeneration. This pleiotropic implication of MMPs in brain injury has open new areas of investigation, which should lead to innovative therapeutic strategies. Yet MMPs may have a detrimental or beneficial role depending on the stage of brain injury. Simple therapeutic strategies based on MMP inhibition have thus little chance to favorably alter prognosis.<newchar><newabs>20454659<newchar>Prostate epithelial cells from both normal and cancer tissues, grown in three-dimensional (3D) culture as spheroids, represent promising in vitro models for the study of normal and cancer-relevant patterns of epithelial differentiation. We have developed the most comprehensive panel of miniaturized prostate cell culture models in 3D to date (n = 29), including many non-transformed and most currently available classic prostate cancer (PrCa) cell lines. The purpose of this study was to analyze morphogenetic properties of PrCa models in 3D, to compare phenotypes, gene expression and metabolism between 2D and 3D cultures, and to evaluate their relevance for pre-clinical drug discovery, disease modeling and basic research. Primary and non-transformed prostate epithelial cells, but also several PrCa lines, formed well-differentiated round spheroids. These showed strong cell-cell contacts, epithelial polarization, a hollow lumen and were covered by a complete basal lamina (BL). Most PrCa lines, however, formed large, poorly differentiated spheroids, or aggressively invading structures. In PC-3 and PC-3M cells, well-differentiated spheroids formed, which were then spontaneously transformed into highly invasive cells. These cell lines may have previously undergone an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is temporarily suppressed in favor of epithelial maturation by signals from the extracellular matrix (ECM). The induction of lipid and steroid metabolism, epigenetic reprogramming, and ECM remodeling represents a general adaptation to 3D culture, regardless of transformation and phenotype. In contrast, PI3-Kinase, AKT, STAT/interferon and integrin signaling pathways were particularly activated in invasive cells. Specific small molecule inhibitors targeted against PI3-Kinase blocked invasive cell growth more effectively in 3D than in 2D monolayer culture, or the growth of normal cells. Our panel of cell models, spanning a wide spectrum of phenotypic plasticity, supports the investigation of different modes of cell migration and tumor morphologies, and will be useful for predictive testing of anti-cancer and anti-metastatic compounds.<newchar><newabs>18684718<newchar>In healthy subjects, the respiratory epithelium forms a continuous lining to the airways and to the environment, and plays a unique role as a barrier against external deleterious agents to protect the airways from the insults. In respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic bronchitis, or asthma, the airway epithelium is frequently remodeled and injured, leading to the impairment of its defense functions. The rapid restoration of the epithelial barrier is crucial for these patients. The complete regeneration of the airway epithelium is a complex phenomenon, including not only the epithelial wound repair but also the epithelial differentiation to reconstitute a fully well differentiated and functional epithelium. The regeneration implies two partners: the epithelial stem/progenitor cells and factors able to regulate this process. Among these factors, epithelial cells-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions play a crucial role. The secretion of a provisional ECM, the cell-ECM relationships through epithelial receptors, and the remodeling of the ECM by proteases (mainly matrix metalloproteinases) contribute not only to airway epithelial repair by modulating epithelial cell migration and proliferation, but also to the differentiation of repairing cells leading to the complete restoration of the wounded epithelium. A better characterization of resident stem cells and of effectors of the regeneration process is an essential prerequisite to propose new regenerative therapeutics to patients suffering from infectious/inflammatory respiratory diseases.<newchar><newabs>15282149<newchar>Receptor-mediated cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions are critical regulators of cell survival, and perturbing these signaling pathways can disrupt cellular differentiation and function in a variety of tissues, including the mammary gland. One such receptor is the cell surface-associated, long isoform of beta1,4-galactosyltransferase I (GalT I). Deletion of long GalT I leads to increased mammary ductal branching morphogenesis [Dev. Biol., 244 (2002) 114]. Here, we show that this expansion in the mammary epithelial (ME) cell compartment is accomplished through decreased apoptosis during pregnancy and involution. Decreased apoptosis during involution is concomitant with delayed alveolar collapse, persistent expression of the milk protein gene alpha-lactalbumin and delayed expression of genes associated with the tissue-remodeling phase of involution. Using 3-dimensional in vitro cultures, we show that the decrease in apoptosis is dependent on laminin 1, a ligand for surface GalT I, suggesting that surface GalT I negatively influences ECM-dependent cell survival, a novel function for an ECM receptor. In the best-studied examples, ECM promotes survival through integrin receptor-mediated activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK). Aggregation of surface GalT I also activates FAK, therefore, we asked if FAK activation was altered in ME from long GalT I null mice. Activated FAK was appropriately localized to focal adhesions in long GalT I null ME. However, FAK activation was constitutively reduced 4.5-fold in long GalT I nulls relative to wild type. Expression of the integrin beta1 subunit was not affected by loss of long GalT I. Collectively, these results suggest that surface GalT I might negatively regulate ME cell survival by linking integrin-independent FAK activation to apoptotic rather than survival signaling events.<newchar><newabs>19762920<newchar>An extracellular microenvironment, including an extracellular matrix (ECM), is an important factor in regulating stem cell differentiation. During tissue development, the ECM is dynamically remodeled to regulate stem cell functions. Here, we developed matrices mimicking ECM remodeling during the osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). The matrices were prepared from cultured MSCs controlled at different stages of osteogenesis and referred to as &quot;stepwise osteogenesis-mimicking matrices.&quot; The matrices supported the adhesion and proliferation of MSCs and showed different effects on the osteogenesis of MSCs. On the matrices mimicking the early stage of osteogenesis (early stage matrices), the osteogenesis occurred more rapidly than did that on the matrices mimicking undifferentiated stem cells (stem cell matrices) and the late stage of osteogenesis (late stage matrices). RUNX2 was similarly expressed when MSCs were cultured on both the early stage and late stage matrices but decreased on the stem cell matrices. PPARG expression in the MSCs cultured on the late stage matrices was higher than for those cultured on the stem cell and early stage matrices. This increase of PPARG expression was caused by the suppression of the amount of beta-catenin and downstream signal transduction. These results demonstrate that the osteogenesis-mimicking matrices had different effects on the osteogenesis of MSCs, and the early stage matrices provided a favorable microenvironment for the osteogenesis.<newchar><newabs>16687572<newchar>The molecular mechanisms that regulate multicellular architecture and the development of extended apical bile canalicular lumens in hepatocytes are poorly understood. Here, we show that hepatic HepG2 cells cultured on glass coverslips first develop intercellular apical lumens typically formed by a pair of cells. Prolonged cell culture results in extensive organizational changes, including cell clustering, multilayering, and apical lumen morphogenesis. The latter includes the development of large acinar structures and subsequent elongated canalicular lumens that span multiple cells. These morphological changes closely resemble the early organizational pattern during development, regeneration, and neoplasia of the liver and are rapidly induced when cells are cultured on predeposited extracellular matrix (ECM). Inhibition of Rho kinase or its target myosin-II ATPase in cells cultured on glass coverslips mimics the morphogenic response to ECM. Consistently, stimulation of Rho kinase and subsequent myosin-II ATPase activity by lipoxygenase-controlled eicosatetranoic acid metabolism inhibits ECM-mediated cell multilayering and apical lumen morphogenesis but not initial apical lumen formation. Furthermore, apical lumen remodeling but not cell multilayering requires basal p42/44 MAPK activity. Together, the data suggest a role for hepatocyte-derived ECM in the spatial organization of hepatocytes and apical lumen morphogenesis and identify Rho kinase, myosin-II, and MAPK as potentially important players in different aspects of bile canalicular lumen morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>17980685<newchar>In vitro cell culture is a vital research tool for cell biology, pharmacology, toxicology, protein production, systems biology and drug discovery. Traditional culturing methods on plastic surfaces do not accurately represent the in vivo environment, and a paradigm shift from two-dimensional to three-dimensional (3-D) experimental techniques is underway. To enable this change, a variety of natural, synthetic and semi-synthetic extracellular matrix (ECM) equivalents have been developed to provide an appropriate cellular microenvironment. We describe herein an investigation of the properties of four commercially available ECM equivalents on the growth and proliferation of primary human tracheal scar fibroblast behavior, both in 3-D and pseudo-3-D conditions. We also compare subcutaneous tissue growth of 3-D encapsulated fibroblasts in vivo in two of these materials, Matrigel and Extracel. The latter shows increased cell proliferation and remodeling of the ECM equivalent. The results provide researchers with a rational basis for selection of a given ECM equivalent based on its biological performance in vitro and in vivo, as well as the practicality of the experimental protocols. Biomaterials that use a customizable glycosaminoglycan-based hydrogel appear to offer the most convenient and flexible system for conducting in vitro research that accurately translates to in vivo physiology needed for tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>17627539<newchar>Heparanase is an endoglycosidase which cleaves heparan sulfate (HS) and hence participates in degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Heparanase is preferentially expressed in human tumors and its over-expression in tumor cells confers an invasive phenotype in experimental animals. The enzyme also releases angiogenic factors from the ECM and thereby induces an angiogenic response in vivo. Heparanase upregulation correlates with increased tumor vascularity and poor postoperative survival of cancer patients. Heparanase is synthesized as a 65 kDa inactive precursor that undergoes proteolytic cleavage, yielding 8 kDa and 50 kDa protein subunits that heterodimerize to form an active enzyme. Heparanase exhibits also non-enzymatic activities, independent of its involvement in ECM degradation. Among these, are the enhancement of Akt signaling, stimulation of PI3K- and p38-dependent endothelial cell migration, and up regulation of VEGF, all contributing to its potent pro-angiogenic activity. Studies on relationships between structure and heparanase inhibition activity of nonanticogulant heparins systematically differing in their O-sulfation patterns, degrees of N-acetylation, and glycol-splitting of both pre-existing nonsulfated uronic acid residues (prevalently D-glucuronic) and/or those (L-iduronic acid/L-galacturonic acid) generated by graded 2-O-desulfation, have permitted to select effective inhibitors of the enzymatic activity of heparanase. N-acetylated, glycol-split heparins emerged as especially strong inhibitors of heparanase, exerting little or no release of growth factors from ECM. N-acetylated glycol-split species of heparin, as well as heparanase gene silencing inhibit tumor metastasis, angiogenesis and inflammation in experimental animal models. These observations and the unexpected identification of a single functional heparanase, suggest that the enzyme is a promising target for anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory drug development.<newchar><newabs>11518194<newchar>The cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) is a dynamic entity maintaining the structural and functional properties of the myocardium. Little is known about alterations in ECM regulation during controlled induction of compensated left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) using experimental aortic stenosis. Fifteen growing sheep received supra-coronary banding at an age of 7 +/- 1 months whereas 10 age-matched sheep served as the control group (C). Explantation of the hearts was performed 8.3 +/- 1 months after banding. Gene sequences for sheep matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1,-2,-3,-9 and tissue inhibitors (TIMP)-1,-2,-3 were isolated and cloned. Then mRNA and protein gene expression analyses were performed. Concentric LVH with no evidence of heart failure was diagnosed at explantation. Left ventricular mass index (LVMI) was 150 +/- 33 g/m2 (LVH) versus 88 +/- 23 (C) and 82 +/- 21 (baseline) (p &lt; 0.01 versus LVH). Parallel to LVH there was a significant increase in mRNA and protein expression for MMP-1,-2,-3, -9 and for TIMP-1,-2 whereas there was a significant decrease in TIMP-3 gene expression. A close correlation between changes in LVMI and ECM gene expression was found. Compensated LVH goes along with a significant modification of MMP and TIMP gene expression. Alterations in ECM gene expression may be part of the adaptive process during left ventricular remodeling.<newchar><newabs>11001836<newchar>The role of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) in the production and deposition of collagens and in the induction of gene expression in the myocardium in relation to the development of myocardial fibrosis will be discussed. Very low expression of TGF-beta(1) and collagen type I and III mRNA is seen in the normal rat heart. Both expressions are markedly increased in the infarcted heart and the levels of TGF-beta(1) mRNA precedes increases in mRNA levels for extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, suggesting a possible role of TGF-beta(1) in remodeling processes in the myocardium. The TGF-beta(1) expression is normally only transient since continuous TGF-beta(1) overexpression seems to promote nonadaptive cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis. In vitro, TGF-beta(1) induces an increase in collagen production and secretion and enhances the abundance of mRNA levels for collagen type I and III in rat cardiac fibroblasts in culture. TGF-beta(1) also stimulates in vivo the expression of ECM proteins and in vivo gene transfer of TGF-beta(1) can induce myocardial fibrosis. Increased myocardial TGF-beta(1) and ECM protein mRNA are found in myocardial fibrosis induced by angiotensin II infusion, by noradrenaline treatment, by isoprenaline infusion, and by long-term blockade of NO synthesis. In vivo antagonism of TGF-beta(1) by neutralizing anti-TGF-beta(1) antibodies or by proteoglycans prevents the increase in gene expression of ECM proteins and inhibits myocardial fibrosis, suggesting that the increases in matrix protein production and fibrosis are mediated by TGF-beta(1).<newchar><newabs>11286132<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are, thus, crucial in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human prostatic carcinomas employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in lung adenocarcinomas, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Focal (+), low to high intensity (C to A) staining could be detected for MMP-2, while no immunoreactivity was observed employing MoABs directed against MMP-9 and -13. Thus, it seems that the stromelysins are involved in the generalized growth and expansion of the neoplastic cell mass, while MMP-2 is involved in the neoangiogenic and focal clonal selection and expansion phenomena associated with in situ tumor progression, invasion of the microvasculature, and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>12235283<newchar>Programmed cell death is crucial for the development and maintenance of multicellular organisms. The decision to live, or to die, depends, at the cellular level, upon the cell's interaction with extracellular cues that trigger cell signaling pathways promoting survival or death. The extracellular matrix (ECM) influences the execution of the apoptotic program through the actions of adhesion receptors. Among these, integrins initiate a variety of downstream signaling events in response to ECM ligation. Integrins directly activate survival pathways via the PI 3-kinase and MAPK pathways and act as essential cofactors for their stimulation by growth factors. Conversely, elevated integrin expression in the absence of appropriate ligands, or in the presence of natural or synthetic antagonists, can promote apoptosis under otherwise permissive growth conditions. Integrins thus act in a crucial biosensory role, coordinating survival or death responses as a function of ECM composition. This dual function provides an elegant mechanism through which tissue-remodeling events may regulate cell death or survival in a temporal, ECM-governed manner.<newchar><newabs>11210857<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are thus crucial in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the persent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in HCCs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). No immunoreactivity was detected using antibodies directed against MMP-2, -9, and -13.<newchar><newabs>10330028<newchar>We have previously shown that an intermittent mechanical strain regimen (5% elongation, 60 cycles/min, 15 min/h) that simulates fetal breathing movements stimulated fetal rat lung cell proliferation. Because normal lung growth requires proper coordination between cell proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, we subjected organotypic cultures of fetal rat lung cells (day 19 of gestation, term = 22 days) to this strain regimen and examined alterations in ECM gene and protein expression. Northern analysis revealed that mechanical strain reduced messages for procollagen-alpha1(I) and biglycan and increased the levels of mRNA for collagen-alpha1(IV) and -alpha2(IV), whereas laminin beta-chain mRNA levels remained constant. Regardless of mRNA changes, mechanical strain increased the protein content of type I and type IV collagen as well as of biglycan in the medium. Mechanical strain did not affect gene expression of several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), such as MMP-1 (interstitial collagenase), MMP-2 (gelatinase A), and MMP-3 (stromelysin-1). Neither collagenase nor gelatinase (A and B) activities in conditioned medium were affected by mechanical strain. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase activities in conditioned medium remained unchanged during the 48-h intermittent mechanical stretching. These data suggest that an intermittent mechanical strain differentially regulates gene and protein expression of ECM molecules in fetal lung cells. The observed increase in matrix accumulation appears to be mainly a result of an increased synthesis of ECM molecules and not of decreasing activity of degradative enzymes.<newchar><newabs>15174890<newchar>While asthma is an inflammatory disorder of the airways involving mediators released from mast cells and eosinophils, inflammation alone is insufficient to explain the chronic nature of the disease. Recent progress in the understanding of disease pathogenesis has revealed that airway remodeling, which is at least in part due to an excess of extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the airway wall, plays a significant role in airflow obstruction. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been suggested to be the major proteolytic enzymes to induce airway remodeling in asthma and COPD. It has been widely accepted that different inflammatory processes are involved in asthma and COPD with different inflammatory cells, mediators, and responses to treatments. Despite these different processes, airflow obstruction and airway remodeling characterize these two diseases. MMP-2 and -9 have been reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of airway remodeling in both diseases and MMP-12, in addition to these MMPs, in the pathogenesis of COPD. In this review, we discuss the current views on the role of MMPs in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma and COPD. Anti-MMP therapy could theoretically be useful to prevent airway remodeling in asthma and COPD. However, to date no clinical data are available regarding the efficacy of anti-MMP therapies in the treatment of patients with asthma and COPD.<newchar><newabs>10705346<newchar>In this study, the presence of cells in the intimal region of normal adult bovine pulmonary artery (BPA) was examined by analysis of longitudinal sections at the level of light and transmission electron microscopy. In addition, the morphological and immunohistochemical phenotype of these cells as well as the presence of particular extracellular matrix (ECM) components in this region were also determined. Since ECM production and cell proliferation have been demonstrated to be regulated by locally released growth factors such as transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta), the presence of TGFbeta-1 in this region was also investigated. Our findings reveal the presence of immature or &quot;nonmuscle&quot; cells into the subendothelial space of normal adult BPA. These cells were characterized by the presence of abundant cytoplasmic organelles and scanty microfilaments. Such cells were negative to antibodies against smooth muscle alpha actin (SM alpha-actin), 1E12, and vWf, but not to vimentin. Similar cells have recently been detected in normal adult BPA and canine carotid arteries, but in the medial region. Because of their location in these elastic arteries, the nonmuscle cells are involved not only in the remodeling of the medial region, but also in the neointima or intimal thickening formation by migration from the media to the subendothelial space, where they proliferate and secrete ECM components. However, a limited number of morphological studies and the current investigation describe the presence of scattered nonmuscle cells within the intima of some normal elastic arteries. This would suggest an important role for these resident cells within the intima in normal and pathological processes as well. In addition, our results show the presence, in this region, of TGFbeta-1 and of ECM components that include collagen, elastin, fibronectin, and laminin which are present in normal conditions and during the intima formation in vivo.<newchar><newabs>10949580<newchar>Cell migration in three-dimensional (3-D) extracellular matrix (ECM) is not a uniform event but rather comprises a modular spectrum of interdependent biophysical and biochemical cell functions. Haptokinetic cell migration across two-dimensional (2-D) surfaces consists of at least three processes: (i) the protrusion of the leading edge for adhesive cell-substratum interactions is followed by (ii) contraction of the cell body and (iii) detachment of the trailing edge. In cells of flattened morphology migrating slowly across 2-D substrate, contact-dependent clustering of adhesion receptors including integrins results in focal contact and stress fiber formation. While haptokinetic migration is predominantly a function of adhesion and deadhesion events lacking spatial barriers towards the advancing cell body, the biophysics of the tissues require a set of cellular strategies to overcome matrix resistance. Matrix barriers force the cells to adapt their morphology and change shape and/or enzymatically degrade ECM components, either by contact-dependent proteolysis or by protease secretion. In 3-D ECM, in contrast to 2-D substrate, the cell shape is mostly bipolar and the cytoskeletal organization is less stringent, frequently lacking discrete focal contacts and stress fibers. Morphologically large spindle-shaped cells (i.e., fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and many tumor cells) of high integrin expression and strong cytoskeletal contractility utilize integrin-dependent migration strategies that are coupled to the capacity to reorganize ECM. In contrast, a more dynamic ameboid migration type employed by smaller cells expressing low levels of integrins (i.e., T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, some tumor cells) is characterized by largely integrin-independent interaction strategies and flexible morphological adaptation to preformed fiber strands, without structurally changing matrix architecture. In tumor invasion and angiogenesis, migration mechanisms further comprise the migration of entire cell clusters or strands maintaining stringent cell-cell adhesion and communication while migrating. Lastly, cellular interactions, enzyme and cytokine secretion, and tissue remodeling provided by reactive stroma cells (i.e. fibroblasts and macrophages) contribute to cell migration. In conclusion, depending on the cellular composition and tissue context of migration, diverse cellular and molecular migration strategies can be developed by different cell types.<newchar><newabs>20641988<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). The splice variant v6 of the cell membrane glycoprotein CD44 (CD44v6) is expressed only in a few normal epithelial tissues (e.g., thyroid and prostate gland). CD44 binds to ECM and is associated with cell adhesion, lymphocyte activation, and tumor cell metastases (4, 5). Elevated levels of CD44v6 have been found in epithelial tumors, which are associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (5). Anti-CD44v6 chimeric (mouse/human) monoclonal antibody (cMAb) U36 was found not bind to follicles or C cells from normal human thyroid (6). CD44v6 is generally highly expressed in thyroid carcinoma (7). (124)I-cMAb U36 was developed for imaging of CD44v6 expression in thyroid carcinoma and other epithelial tumors (8, 9). However, production of (124)I is too expensive for routine clinical application. Verel et al. (10) explored the use of (89)Zr positron emitter (half-life, 3.27 days) to radiolabel cMAb U36. (89)Zr was conjugated to a bifunctional derivative of desferrioxamine B (Df) to cMAB U36 for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of CD44v6 expression in tumors. (89)Zr-N-Succinyldesferal-cMAb U36 ((89)Zr-N-SucDf-cMAb U36) has been studied in tumor-bearing mice and humans (11, 12).<newchar><newabs>10357908<newchar>A number of studies have demonstrated the critical role of angiogenesis for successful wound repair in the surgical patient. Vascular disruption from tissue injury due to trauma or surgery leads to a hypoxic zone in the healing wound. In this dynamic process, angiogenesis is vital for the delivery of oxygen, nutrients, and growth factors necessary to initiate the synthetic processes of wound healing. Fibroblasts, invading the wound early in the healing process, are involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition as well as wound contraction. However, the exact mechanisms by which important genes are regulated remain unknown. In order to examine these processes, we studied the effects of hypoxia on fibroblasts for the expression of VEGF, type IalphaI collagen, and matrix-metalloproteinase-3, three genes essential for the regulation of angiogenesis, ECM deposition, and ECM degradation in wound healing. Primary cell cultures of normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDFs) were placed in hypoxia for varying periods of time. Northern blot hybridization was performed with [alpha32P]dCTP-labeled cDNA probes for VEGF, type IalphaI collagen, and MMP-3. The results demonstrated a time-dependent VEGF mRNA upregulation (470% of baseline) under hypoxia. Type IalphaI collagen increased (170% of baseline) at 24 h, but was then abruptly downregulated to 3.8% of baseline at 48 h. MMP-3 was incrementally downregulated to 2.2% of baseline at 48 h. These experiments focused on the effect of hypoxia on genes thought to play a role in wound repair. VEGF upregulation in the hypoxic microenvironment of the early wound may serve to stimulate angiogenesis. Type IalphaI collagen, though upregulated early on, was abruptly downregulated at 48 h. This downregulation may reflect the in vivo requirement for angiogenesis to deliver oxygen for successful hydroxylation and collagen synthesis in the wound. MMP-3, also downregulated at 48 h, may also implicate the need for angiogenesis. These data support the theory that hypoxia-driven angiogenesis is critical for ECM formation and remodeling in successful soft tissue repair. Furthermore, they may represent the role of hypoxia as an important regulator to efficiently balance these complex processes in the healing wound.<newchar><newabs>20641884<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion proteins consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Mindins are members of the mindin/F-spondin family of secreted ECM proteins (4). A human mindin homolog, mindin/RG-1, is expressed selectively in prostate tissues, and its expression level is elevated in some prostate tumors (5). Mindin/RG-1 protein expression is maintained in &gt;80% of prostate cancers metastatic to bone or lymph nodes as well as in locally recurrent tumors in androgen-unresponsive patients. Furthermore, mindin/RG-1 expression in other normal tissues is lower than that expressed in the prostate. The fully humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) 19G9 was generated against the mindin/RG-1 protein. Conjugation of mAb 19G9 with the bifunctional chelator [(R)-2-amino-3-(4-isothiocyanatophenyl)propyl]-trans(S,S)-cyclohexane-1,2-diethylene triamine-pentaacetic acid (CHX-A''-DTPA) produced CHX-A''-DTPA-19G9, which was used for (111)In labeling (5). (111)In-CHX-A''-DTPA-19G9 has been evaluated in nude mice bearing human LNCaP tumor xenografts (5, 6).<newchar><newabs>12960035<newchar>During pregnancy in the primate, uterine stromal fibroblasts are transformed into decidual cells. Decidualization is associated with extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in ECM degradation. We hypothesized that MMPs also contribute to regulation of IGF binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), a biochemical marker of primate decidual cells. We reported that IL-1beta (10 ng/ml) with steroid hormones [36 nm estradiol-17beta, 1 microm medroxyprogesterone acetate (P), and 100 ng/ml relaxin] induces in vitro IGFBP-1 synthesis. This study demonstrates that IL-1beta also induces stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) mRNA and synthesis of the latent form of MMP-3 (pro-MMP-3) protein in baboon stromal fibroblasts. In contrast, hormones (particularly P) negatively regulate MMP-3 because their addition decreases IL-1beta-induced pro-MMP-3 protein. The ERK and p38 MAPK pathways induced by IL-1beta regulate pro-MMP-3 because inhibitors PD98059 (20 microm) and SB203580 (1 microm) prevent its synthesis. The nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitory peptide, SN50 (50 microg/ml), or proteasome inhibitor, MG-132 (1 microm), did not inhibit pro-MMP-3 synthesis but appeared to enhance it. The role of MMPs in IGFBP-1 induction was investigated using a broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor, doxycycline, and specific MMP-3 inhibitor, N-Isobutyl-N-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)-glycylhydroxamic acid (NNGH). Both inhibitors caused the dose-dependent decrease of IGFBP-1. alpha-Smooth muscle actin, which is down-regulated during decidualization, was partially up-regulated by doxycycline or N-Isobutyl-N-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)-glycylhydroxamic acid. This suggests that alpha-smooth muscle actin is modulated by changes in ECM caused by the action of MMPs/MMP-3. Disruption of actin filaments enhances IGFBP-1 induction. Thus, our data imply that IL-1beta-induced MMPs and particularly MMP-3 may up-regulate IGFBP-1 by disrupting the actin cytoskeleton as a result of ECM degradation.<newchar><newabs>20641412<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Galectin-3 (Gal-3) is a carbohydrate-binding protein (30 kDa) with a highly conserved carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) at the C-terminus (4). Gal-3 is found not only on the cell surface but also in the cytoplasm and nucleus. It is also secreted into the extracellular space. Gal-3 is involved in multiple biological conditions such as cellular adhesion, apoptosis, differentiation, metastasis, and inflammation. Gal-3 is found to be overexpressed in various human cancer cells with even higher expression in metastatic cancer cells (5, 6). Interactions of Gal-3 with certain carbohydrates and ECM proteins promote tumor cell adhesion and metastasis through inhibition of tumor cell apoptosis and induction of endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis (7-11). The peptide ANTPCGPYTHDCPVKR (G3-C12) was identified to be a selective binder to Gal-3 with phage display screening, and G3-C12 inhibits adhesion of tumor cells to endothelial cells (12). Kumar et al. (13) introduced the linker GSG to the N-terminus alanine (A) of the G3-C12 peptide for conjugation with tetraazacyclododecane-N,N’,N’’,N’’’-tetraacetic acid (DOTA) for labeling with (111)In. (111)In-DOTA(GSG)-G3-C12 has been evaluated as a single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) agent for Gal-3 expression in tumors in vivo (13, 14).<newchar><newabs>19178437<newchar>Tissue-engineered blood vessel substitutes should closely resemble native vessels in terms of structure, composition, mechanical properties, and function. Successful cardiovascular tissue engineering requires optimization of in vitro culture environment that would produce functional constructs. The extracellular matrix (ECM) protein elastin plays an essential role in the cardiovascular system to render elasticity to blood vessel wall, whereas collagen is responsible for providing mechanical strength. The objective of this study was to understand the significance of various ECM components on endothelial cell (EC) growth and tissue generation. We demonstrate that, even though fibrin is a good matrix for EC growth, fibronectin is the crucial component of the fibrin matrix that enhances EC adhesion, spreading, and proliferation. Vascular EC growth factor is known to influence in vitro growth of EC, but, so far, ECM deposition in in vitro culture has not been reported. In this study, it is shown that incorporation of a mixture of hypothalamus-derived angiogenic growth factors with fibrin matrix enhances synthesis and deposition of insoluble elastin and collagen in the matrix, within 10 days of in vitro culture. The results suggest that a carefully engineered fibrin composite matrix may support EC growth, survival, and remodeling of ECM in vitro and impart optimum properties to the construct for resisting the shear stress at the time of implantation.<newchar><newabs>20483209<newchar>Trout normally spawn at 3 years of age, however, a small percentage mature a year early. This provides an opportunity to study reproductive timing and developmental processes. The ovarian and testicular extracellular matrix (ECM) participates in processes such as growth, adhesion, differentiation, cell migration and patterning. The composition of the ECM defines the interactions of specific regulatory ligands with their receptors and modulates and regulates gonadal function. To identify some of the genes involved in these processes, a 16,006-gene salmonid cDNA microarray was used to compare three-year-old normal with two-year-old normal (maturing) and with two-year-old precocious (pre-spawn) ovarian and testicular transcriptomes. We provide evidence for differences in expression of some of the genes during vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, fibrillogenesis and other processes involving ECM remodeling. Sex-specific gene expression differences of ECM components were documented between the trout ovary and testis in each developmental state. Significant differences in the expression of genes involved in translation, transcription, cell-cycling and differentiation were identified. We also report, for the first time, unequivocal evidence for the transcription of high levels of adult and embryonic hemoglobins in the developed ovary; and for the expression of transcripts that encode zona pellucida glycoproteins in both the ovary and testis of trout.<newchar><newabs>18801572<newchar>The collagen fiber alignment and biomechanical behavior of naturally occurring extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds are important considerations for the design of medical devices from these materials. Both should be considered in order to produce a device to meet tissue specific mechanical requirements (e.g., tendon vs. urinary bladder), and could ultimately affect the remodeling response in vivo. The present study evaluated the collagen fiber alignment and biaxial mechanical behavior of ECM scaffold material harvested from porcine urinary bladder tunica mucosa and basement membrane (together referred to as urinary bladder matrix (UBM)) and ECM harvested from urinary bladder submucosa (UBS). Since the preparation of UBM allows for control of the direction of delamination, the effect of the delamination method on the mechanical behavior of UBM was determined by delaminating the submucosa and other abluminal layers by scraping along the longitudinal axis of the bladder (apex to neck) (UBML) or along the circumferential direction (UBMC). The processing of UBS does not allow for similar directional control. UBML and UBS had similar collagen fiber distributions, with a preferred collagen fiber alignment along the longitudinal direction. UBMC showed a more homogenous collagen fiber orientation. All samples showed a stiffer mechanical behavior in the longitudinal direction. Despite similar collagen fiber distributions, UBML and UBS showed quite different mechanical behavior for the applied loading patterns with UBS showing a much more pronounced toe region. The mechanical behavior for UBMC in both directions was similar to the mechanical behavior of UBML. There are distinct differences in the mechanical behavior of different layers of ECM from the porcine urinary bladder, and the processing methods can substantially alter the mechanical behavior observed.<newchar><newabs>10085301<newchar>Intercalated epithelial cells exist in a spectrum of phenotypes; at one extreme, beta cells secrete HCO3 by an apical Cl/HCO3 exchanger and a basolateral H+ ATPase. When an immortalized beta cell line is seeded at high density it deposits in its extracellular matrix (ECM) a new protein, hensin, which can reverse the polarity of several proteins including the Cl/HCO3 exchanger (an alternately spliced form of band 3) and the proton translocating ATPase. When seeded at low density and allowed to form monolayers these polarized epithelial cells maintain the original distribution of these two proteins. Although these cells synthesize and secrete hensin, it is not retained in the ECM, but rather, hensin is present in a large number of intracellular vesicles. The apical cytoplasm of low density cells is devoid of actin, villin, and cytokeratin19. Scanning electron microscopy shows that these cells have sparse microvilli, whereas high density cells have exuberant apical surface infolding and microvilli. The apical cytoplasm of high density cells contains high levels of actin, cytokeratin19, and villin. The cell shape of these two phenotypes is different with high density cells being tall with a small cross-sectional area, whereas low density cells are low and flat. This columnarization and the remodeling of the apical cytoplasm is hensin-dependent; it can be induced by seeding low density cells on filters conditioned by high density cells and prevented by an antibody to hensin. The changes in cell shape and apical cytoskeleton are reminiscent of the processes that occur in terminal differentiation of the intestine and other epithelia. Hensin is highly expressed in the intestine and prostate (two organs where there is a continuous process of differentiation). The expression of hensin in the less differentiated crypt cells of the intestine and the basal cells of the prostate is similar to that of low density cells; i.e., abundant intracellular vesicles but no localization in the ECM. On the other hand, as in high density cells hensin is located exclusively in the ECM of the terminally differentiated absorptive villus cells and the prostatic luminal cell. These studies suggest that hensin is a critical new molecule in the terminal differentiation of intercalated cell and perhaps other epithelial cells.<newchar><newabs>17804488<newchar>Epithelial cells are characterized by the ability to form sheets of cells that surround fluid-filled lumens. Cells in these sheets exhibit a characteristic subcellular polarity, with an apical pole that faces the lumen and a basolateral pole that is in contact with other cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM). To investigate the signaling events required for polarization and lumen formation, we have taken advantage of the ability of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells to dynamically remodel their polarity in response to changes in ECM cues. When MDCK cells are grown in suspension culture, they form multicellular &quot;inside-out&quot; cysts with apical proteins found on the peripheral surface and basolateral markers on the interior surface. When these inside-out cysts are embedded in ECM, they rapidly reorient their polarity: apical proteins become localized to the inside surface, and basolateral proteins are found on the surface that contacts ECM. Here we have characterized the signaling requirements for these early molecular reorientation events. Specifically, expression of a dominant-negative form of Rac1 (DN-Rac1) blocks the reorientation of polarity. Phosphoinositide 3'-kinase is required for apical membrane protein remodeling from the initial apical membrane surface. Cells expressing DN-Rac1 fail to detectably activate the PI 3-kinase/protein kinase B pathway. Last, we found that atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) is also required for reorientation of polarity, since an inhibitor of atypical PKC blocks reorientation. This effect cannot be overcome by constitutively active Rac1, demonstrating that both Rac1 and atypical PKC are required for reorientation of cellular polarity.<newchar><newabs>17686880<newchar>Mechanical load and chemical factors as stimuli for the different pattern of the extracellular matrix (ECM) could be responsible for cardiac dysfunction. Since fibroblasts can both synthesize and degrade ECM, ventricular fibroblasts from adult rat hearts underwent cyclical mechanical stretch (CMS; 0.33 Hz) by three different elongations (3%, 6%, 9%) and four different serum concentrations (0%, 0.5%, 5%, 10%) within 24 h. Expression of collagen I and III, as well as matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), tissue inhibitor of MMP-2 (TIMP-2), and colligin were analyzed by RNase protection assay. In the absence of serum, 9% CMS increased the mRNA of collagen I by 1.70-fold and collagen III by 1.64-fold. This increase was prevented by the inhibition either of PKC or of tyrosine kinase but not of PKA. Inhibition of PKC or tyrosine kinase itself reduced the expression of collagen I and collagen III mRNA. The mRNA of MMP-2, TIMP-2, and colligin showed the same tendency by stretch. Combined with 10% serum, 6% CMS reduced the mRNA of collagen I (0.62-fold) and collagen III (0.79-fold). Inhibition of PKC or tyrosine kinase, but not of PKA, prevented the reduction of collagen I and collagen III mRNA in 10% serum. The results show that the response of fibroblasts to CMS depends on the serum concentration. At least two signaling pathways are involved in the stretch-induced ECM regulation. Myocardial fibrosis due to ECM remodeling contributes to the dysfunction of the failing heart, which might be attributed to changes in hemodynamic loading.<newchar><newabs>17613314<newchar>Nonmuscle cells exert biomechanical forces known as traction forces on the extracellular matrix (ECM). Spatial coordination of these traction forces against the ECM is in part responsible for directing cell migration, for remodeling the surrounding tissue scaffold, and for the folds and rearrangements seen during morphogenesis. The traction forces are applied through a number of discrete adhesions between a cell and the ECM. We have developed a device consisting of an array of flexible, microfabricated posts capable of measuring these forces under an adherent cell. Functionalizing the top of each post with ECM protein allows cells to attach and spread across the tops of the posts. Deflection of the tips of the posts is proportional to cell-generated traction forces during cell migration or contraction. In this chapter, we describe the microfabrication, preparation, and experimental use of such microfabricated post array detector system (mPADs).<newchar><newabs>17080262<newchar>The pathophysiology of wound healing in the bowel wall suggests that collagen and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have an important role in the changes of the bowel wall seen in several colonic diseases. Several recent studies suggest that disturbances of the collagen texture and the extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism are major factors leading to the onset of diverticular disease. Changes of the ECM also play a role in the development of inflammatory bowel diseases. Regarding the permanent remodeling of the bowel wall, any imbalance of the ECM could support the onset of chronic inflammation and the development of fistula formation, such as that seen in patients with Crohn's disease. Disturbances of the ECM play a role in the pathogenesis of anastomotic leakage after large bowel surgery and suggest the presence of a genetically defined risk population with disturbed wound healing mechanisms. This concept could explain the well known situation where an anastomotic breakdown is observed, despite the absence of other known risk factors and after a technically correct anastomosis.<newchar><newabs>18342393<newchar>Invadopodia are actin-dependent organelles that function in the invasion and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by tumor cells. Cortactin, a regulator of the Arp2/3 complex, is of particular importance in invadopodia function. While most of the focus has been on the possible role of cortactin in actin assembly for direct formation of actin-rich invadopodia puncta, our recent data suggest that the primary role of cortactin in invadopodia is to promote protease secretion. In this manuscript, we review our previous work and present new data showing that cortactin is essential for both the localization of key invadopodia matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) to actin-positive puncta at the cell-ECM interface and for ECM degradation induced by overexpression of MT1-MMP-GFP. Based on these data and results from the literature, we propose potential mechanisms by which cortactin may link vesicular trafficking and dynamic branched actin assembly to regulate protease secretion for invadopodia-associated ECM degradation.<newchar><newabs>15375740<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) hydrolyze most components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). These proteinases play a central role in many biological processes such as normal tissue remodeling, embryogenesis, wound healing and angiogenesis. Currently about 26 MMP genes have been identified, and most are multidomain zinc endopeptidases. Knowledge of their tertiary structure is crucial for the understanding of the functional properties of MMPs. In healthy tissue a strict regulation of MMPs is critical in order to maintain proper ECM homeostasis. Among other levels of regulation, MMPs are precisely regulated by their main endogenous protein inhibitors (TIMPs). Disruption of this balance results in serious diseases such as fibrosis, arthritis, and tumour growth. Several studies have documented the importance of MMP-mediated ECM destruction for tumour initiation, growth, migration, angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis. Certain MMPs such as gelatinases (MMP-2, MMP-9) have special mechanisms to localize at leading edges in tumour tissue. MMPs can no longer be thought of solely as ECM destructionists, but as part of an elegant communication system through which epithelial and tumor cells interact with the stroma.<newchar><newabs>15814133<newchar>Integrins belong to a family of important cell surface receptors which mediate the adhesion of most anchorage-dependent cells to nature extracellular matrix (ECM) and biomaterials. It is known that the binding of integrin with ECM proteins triggers mechanochemical responses of cytoskeleton. To date, the intricate interplay between integrin-ECM interaction and cytoskeleton dynamics leading to the regulation of cell morphogenesis on biomaterials remains largely unknown. In this study, green fluorescence protein (GFP)-actins were expressed in HepG2 cells for the temporal visualization of cytoskeletal structure of adherent cells on naturally derived materials. By combining confocal reflectance contrast microscopy and fluorescence microscopy, the adhesion contact dynamics, cytoskeleton remodeling and two-dimensional spreading of intact and GFP-actin expressing HepG2 cells on collagen and fibronectin-coated substrates are simultaneously probed during the initial cell seeding. First of all, our results show that the evolution of adhesion contact of HepG2 cells upon integrin-collagen or integrin-fibronectin interaction is impaired by GFP-actin expression. Also, the initial rate of cell deformation is reduced by 70% and 43% on fibronectin and collagen, respectively, upon GFP-actin expression. Interestingly, the steady-state adhesion energy of HepG2 cells remains unchanged and increases on fibronectin- and collagen-coated substrate, respectively, upon GFP-actin expression. Our highly integrated biophysical approach demonstrates that GFP-actins diffusively concentrate in the cytoplasmic cortex during initial cell seeding while adhesion contact evolves and cell spreads. Kinetics analysis on the adhesion contact formation demonstrates the intricate interplay between cytoskeleton property and ECM proteins in cell adhesion.<newchar><newabs>17015622<newchar>Transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1), an important regulator of cell behavior, is secreted as a large latent complex (LLC) in which it is bound to its cleaved prodomain (latency-associated peptide [LAP]) and, via LAP, to latent TGFbeta-binding proteins (LTBPs). The latter target LLCs to the extracellular matrix (ECM). Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BMP1)-like metalloproteinases play key roles in ECM formation, by converting precursors into mature functional proteins, and in morphogenetic patterning, by cleaving the antagonist Chordin to activate BMP2/4. We provide in vitro and in vivo evidence that BMP1 cleaves LTBP1 at two specific sites, thus liberating LLC from ECM and resulting in consequent activation of TGFbeta1 via cleavage of LAP by non-BMP1-like proteinases. In mouse embryo fibroblasts, LAP cleavage is shown to be predominantly matrix metalloproteinase 2 dependent. TGFbeta1 is a potent inducer of ECM formation and of BMP1 expression. Thus, a role for BMP1-like proteinases in TGFbeta1 activation completes a novel fast-forward loop in vertebrate tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>15370292<newchar>Endothelial interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) play important roles in angiogenesis but whether specific ECM signals can determine specific cellular morphologies is unclear. The authors compared in vitro ECM-induced morphological responses of the phenotypically distinct human placental microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs) with large vessel endothelial cells (HUVECs). HPMECs showed distinct patterns of reorganization in response to collagen-I or collagen-IV (monolayer disruption, sprouting, migration) and Matrigel or laminin-A (intussusception, cord formation, tubulogenesis), and an intermediate response to fibrin; whereas HUVECs responded similarly to collagen-1 and Matrigel (elongation, lattice formation, vacuolation) and showed little response to fibrin. Although the extent of collagen and Matrigel responses of HPMECs were increased by serum, acidic or basic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF, bFGF), or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and varied with matrix protein concentration, the basic patterns were matrix specific, and were independent of fibronectin. The collagen responses correlated with disruption of adherens and tight junctions and the formation of filopodial protrusions. Matrigel responses were associated with up-regulated junctional localization of VE-cadherin, and tubulogenesis developed mainly through paracellular remodeling rather than intracellular vacuolation. Overall, these findings suggest that distinct ECM interactions stimulate specific morphological responses. These signals may regulate morphological behaviour in the angiogenesis cycle, switching endothelial cells between migratory and vasculogenic phenotypes.<newchar><newabs>16537652<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) has been traditionally viewed as a static scaffold that supports cells and tissues. However, recent dynamic imaging studies suggest that ECM components are highly elastic and undergo continual movement and deformation. Latent transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) binding protein-1 (LTBP1) is an ECM glycoprotein that binds latent TGFbeta and regulates its availability and activity. LTBP1 initially co-distributes with fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of osteoblasts, and depends on fibronectin for its assembly. To gain further insights into the mechanisms of assembly of LTBP1 and its spatial and temporal interactions with fibronectin, we have performed dual fluorescence time-lapse imaging of these two proteins in living osteoblasts using fluorescent probes. Time-lapse movies showed surprisingly large fibril displacements associated with cellular movement as well as occasional breaking of LTBP1 or fibronectin-containing fibrils. Individual fibrils stretched to as much as 3.5 times or contracted to as much as one fourth of their original length. Motile cells appeared to actively mediate extracellular matrix assembly by adding 'globules' or 'packets' of matrix material onto existing fibrils. They also actively reorganized the extracellular matrix by shunting matrix material from one location to another and exchanging fibrillar material between fibrils. This cell-mediated matrix reorganization was primarily associated with the assembly and remodeling of the initial (early) matrix, whereas mature, established ECM was more stable. Displacement vector mapping showed that different matrix fibrillar networks within the same cultures can show different dynamic motion in response to cell movement and showed that the motion of fibrils was correlated with cell motion. These data suggest novel cell-mediated mechanisms for assembly and reorganization of the extracellular matrix and highlight a role for cell motility in the assembly process.<newchar><newabs>12007733<newchar>In the heart, collagens are the major extracellular matrix (ECM) protein. The fibrillar collagens of the heart surround and interconnect myocytes and muscle fibers to provide for muscle fiber and myocyte alignment which imparts mechanical support to the myocardium and governs tissue stiffness. Loss of collagen fibrils and struts are said to lead to myocyte slippage, ventricular dilation, and progressive contractile dysfunction. Failed human hearts examined either at autopsy or explantation invariably exhibit alterations of the ECM primarily due to changes in collagen. Modulation of the balance between matrix synthesis and degradation is important in the process of ventricular remodeling and in the pathophysiology of chronic heart failure. Support for the importance of the ECM and activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) in the development of chronic heart failure has been demonstrated both in animal models of heart disease and in humans. A causative role for the ECM in this process was recently revealed in experiments using a transgenic mouse model that expresses the specific collagen-degrading enzyme, MMP-1, in the heart. These studies demonstrated that chronic expression of MMP-1 leads to dynamic changes in the heart and ultimately results in systolic dysfunction. Multiple studies in animal models have also shown that inhibition of MMP activity in animal models of heart failure have attenuated the onset of left ventricular dilatation. Future studies will determine whether inhibition of MMP activity improves morbidity and mortality in patients with heart failure.<newchar><newabs>17989620<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a highly dynamic, elastic, and multicomponent compact structure which fills the space between cells and provides a storage site for growth factors and cytokines. The ECM undergoes constant remodeling, most obviously during development, wound healing, and other repair processes. Fibronectin (FN), a multidomain and multifunctional glycoprotein, is one ECM components which plays not only a structural role, but also a functional one, regulating the cell-ECM interaction. This review focuses on fibrillogenesis. The current state of knowledge about the molecular mechanisms which initiate FN binding to the cell surface through central and N-terminal FN sequences is described. It appears that exciting and drastic changes in the FN molecule's conformation are associated with fibril formation. Globular dimeric FN binds with an integrin receptor on the cell surface. FN-bound alpha5beta1 integrins actively translocate from focal adhesions to fibrillar adhesions and this movement causes stretching of the FN molecule. FN thus becomes extended and fibrillar and dynamic tension forces seem to unmask the cryptic self-association and other sites implicated in FN-matrix assembly. This provides for the formation of a fibrillar matrix network anchoring cells and molecules essential for signal transduction within the tissue. Finally, the molecular process of provisional matrix formation during wound healing is considered. There are some suggestions that modified FN preparations could be applied in medicine, particularly in patients after ischemic injury.<newchar><newabs>12784982<newchar>Porcine-derived xenogeneic extracellular matrix (ECM) has been successfully used as a scaffold for tissue repair and reconstruction in numerous preclinical animal studies and human applications. These scaffolds are completely and rapidly degraded and replaced by host-derived tissues that frequently mimic the original tissue composition and architecture. The purpose of the present study was to examine the morphology of ECM scaffolds after their use for laryngeal reconstruction. Thirty adult female dogs were subjected to a partial hemilaryngectomy. The right thyroid cartilage and vocal fold were replaced with ECM scaffold, and the dogs were painlessly sacrificed from 1 week to 12 months after surgery. Histologic examination of the reconstructed tissue showed the presence of a simple squamous epithelial lining, organized glandular structures within the submucosa, reconstructed thyroid cartilage, and bundles of skeletal muscle by 3 months after surgery. We conclude that ECM scaffolds are promising templates for constructive remodeling of laryngeal tissue.<newchar><newabs>11317524<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are thus, crucial in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human lung adenocarcinomas employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in lung adenocarcinomas, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Focal (+), high intensity (A,B) staining could be detected for MMP-2, -9, and -13. Thus, it seems that the stromelysins are involved in the generalized growth and expansion of the neoplastic cell mass, while MMP-2, -9 and -13 are involved in the neoangiogenic and focal clonal selection and expansion phenomena associated with in situ tumor progression, invasion of the microvasculature, and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>15305297<newchar>The sea cucumber Holothuria glaberrima is an echinoderm capable of regenerating its viscera. Previous studies from our group have shown a striking remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during intestinal regeneration. To study the role of the ECM during regeneration, we have focused on the RGD sequences present in many ECM molecules. Regenerating animals were treated with an RGDS (Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser) peptide that competes with the interaction between RGD sequence and cellular integrins. Saline and RGES (Arg-Gly-Glu-Ser) peptide injections were done as controls. The size of the regenerating intestine was determined, and the regenerating structures were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for the presence of collagen and fibronectin, as well as for muscle and other cells. The results show a delay in intestinal regeneration in animals injected with the RGDS peptide, suggesting that the ECM-integrin interaction plays an important function in the regenerative process.<newchar><newabs>11286133<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are, thus, crucial in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human pancreatic adenocarcinomas employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in lung adenocarcinomas, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Focal (+), high intensity (A,B) staining could be detected for MMP-2 and -13, while no immunoreactivity was observed employing the anti-MMP-9 MoAB. Thus, it seems that the stromelysins are involved in the generalized growth and expansion of the neoplastic cell mass, while MMP-2 and -13 are involved in the neoangiogenic and focal clonal selection and expansion phenomena associated with in situ tumor progression, invasion of the microvasculature, and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>11286131<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are, thus, crucial in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human malignant melanomas (MMs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells/surrounding stroma that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in MMs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (++++), and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Focal (+), high intensity (A,B) staining could be detected for MMP-2, -9, and -13. Thus, it seems that the stromelysins are involved in the generalized growth and expansion of the neoplastic cell mass, while MMP-2, -9 and -13 are involved in the neoangiogenic and focal clonal selection and expansion phenomena associated with in situ tumor progression, invasion of the microvasculature, and metastasis.<newchar><newabs>11205871<newchar>Myocardial infarction (MI), leads to cardiac remodeling, thinning of the ventricle wall, ventricular dilation, and heart failure, and is a leading cause of death. Interactions between the contractile elements of the cardiac myocytes and the extracellular matrix (ECM) help maintain myocyte alignment required for the structural and functional integrity of the heart. Following MI, reorganization of the ECM and the myocytes occurs, contributing to loss of heart function. In certain pathological circumstances, the ECM is modulated such that the structure of the tissue becomes damaged. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes that degrade molecules of the ECM. The present experiments were performed to define the time-course, isozyme subtypes, and cellular source of increased MMP expression that occurs following MI in an experimental rabbit model. Heart tissue samples from infarcted and sham animals were analyzed over a time-course of 1-14 days. By zymography, it was demonstrated that, unlike the sham controls, MMP-9 expression was induced within 24 hours following MI. MMP-3 expression, also absent in sham controls, was induced 2 days after MI. MMP-2 expression was detected in both the sham and infarcted samples and was modestly up-regulated following MI. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) expression was evaluated and shown to be down-regulated following MI, inverse of MMP-9 and MMP-3 expression. Further, MMP-9 and MMP-3 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in myocytes within the infarct. Additional studies were conducted in which cultured rat cardiac myocytes were exposed to a hypoxic environment (2% O2) for 24 hours and the media analyzed for MMP expression. MMP-9 and MMP-3 were induced following exposure to hypoxia. It is speculated that the net increase in proteolytic activity by myocytes is a contributing factor leading to myocyte misalignment and slippage. Additional studies with a MMP inhibitor would elucidate this hypothesis.<newchar><newabs>20200130<newchar>The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that maternal undernutrition (MUN) alters offspring vascular expression of micro-RNAs (miRNAs), which, in turn, could regulate the expression of a host of genes involved with angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling. The expression of miRNA and mRNA in the same aortic specimens in 1-day-old (P1) and 12-mo-old offspring aortas of dams, which had 50% food restriction from gestation day 10 to term, was determined by specific rat miRNA and DNA arrays. MUN significantly downregulated the expression of miRNAs 29c, 183, and 422b in the P1 group and 200a, 129, 215, and 200b in the 12-mo group, and upregulated the expression of miRNA 189 in the P1 group and 337 in the 12-mo group. The predicted target genes of the miRNAs altered in the two age groups fell into the categories of: 1) structural genes, such as collagen, elastin, and enzymes involved in ECM remodeling; and 2) angiogenic factors. MUN primarily altered the expression of mRNAs in the functional category of cell cycle/mitosis in the P1 group and anatomic structure and apoptosis in the 12-mo age group. Several of the predicted target genes of miRNAs altered in response to MUN were identified by the DNA array including integrin-beta(1) in the P1 aortas and stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 in the 12-mo age groups. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that MUN modulation of offspring gene expression may be mediated in part by a miRNA mechanism.<newchar><newabs>20600931<newchar>Bmi1, the main component of the Polycomb repressive complex 1, plays a key role in self-renewal of stem cells as well as in proliferation of progenitor cells and senescence, at least in part through inhibition of the Cdkn2a locus. Bmi1 is highly expressed in the developing cerebellum, where it contributes to Shh-mediated expansion of granule cell precursors. Overexpression of Bmi1 has been described in medulloblastoma, highly aggressive brain neoplasms of childhood, which are thought to originate from deregulated proliferation of granule cell precursors. Here, we dissected the molecular mechanisms mediating the role of Bmi1 in granule cell development by means of transcriptome analysis in loss of function mouse models in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate that lack of Bmi1 causes significant shift in gene expression levels in Shh stimulated cerebellar granule progenitors. Our results revealed differences in the expression of a number of genes involved in TGF-beta signal transduction pathway, ECM remodeling and cell adhesion, and particularly, in cell cycle control, not only the well known cell cycle inhibitors p16(Ink4a), p19(Arf) but also Cdkn1a (p21(Waf1/Cip1)). Finally, we demonstrate that Bmi1 directly regulates p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression through direct binding to its promoter and may therefore represent a key mechanism mediating the role of Shh in postnatal cerebellar neurogenesis.<newchar><newabs>21204018<newchar>Cell migration or movement is a highly dynamic cellular process, requiring precise regulation that is essential for a variety of biological processes. microRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of tiny non-coding RNA molecules that function as critical post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Emerging evidence demonstrates that miRNAs play important roles in cell migration and directly contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, cell adhesion, and cell signalling that controls cell migration by targeting a large number of protein-coding genes. Accordingly, the dysregulation of these miRNAs has been linked to several migration-related diseases. In this review, we summarize and highlight the recent advances concerning the roles and validated targets of miRNAs in the control of cell movement.<newchar><newabs>19667757<newchar>Matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are key regulatory molecules in the formation, remodeling and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in both physiological and pathological processes in many tissues. In skeletal muscle, MMPs play an important role in the homeostasis and maintenance of myofiber functional integrity by breaking down ECM and regulating skeletal muscle cell migration, differentiation and regeneration. Skeletal muscle satellite cells, a group of quiescent stem cells located between the basement membrane and the plasmalemma of myofibers, are responsible for lifelong maintenance and repairing, which can be activated and as a result migrate underneath the basement membrane to promote regeneration at the injured site. MMPs are able to degrade ECM components, thereby facilitating satellite cell migration and differentiation. This current review will focus on the critical roles of MMPs in skeletal muscle injury and repair, which include satellite cell activation with migration and differentiation. The effect of MMPs on muscle regeneration and fibrous scar tissue formation, as well as therapeutic insights for the future will be explored.<newchar><newabs>20697347<newchar>The MUC1 cytoplasmic tail (MUC1.CT) conducts signals from spatial and extracellular cues (growth factor and cytokine stimulation) to evoke a reprogramming of the cellular transcriptional profile. Specific phosphorylated forms of the MUC1.CT achieve this function by differentially associating with transcription factors and redirecting their transcriptional regulatory capabilities at specific gene regulatory elements. The specificity of interaction between MUC1.CT and several transcription factors is dictated by the phosphorylation pattern of the 18 potential phosphorylation motifs within the MUC1.CT. To better appreciate the scope of differential gene expression triggered by MUC1.CT activation, we performed microarray gene expression analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip promoter analysis and identified the genome-wide transcriptional targets of MUC1.CT signaling in pancreatic cancer. On a global scale, MUC1.CT preferentially targets genes related to invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis, suggesting that MUC1.CT signaling contributes to establishing a reactive tumor microenvironment during tumor progression to metastatic disease. We examined in detail the molecular mechanisms of MUC1.CT signaling that induces the expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2), a potent mediator of ECM remodeling and angiogenesis. We demonstrate a robust induction of CTGF synthesis and secretion in response to serum factors that is enabled only when MUC1 is highly expressed. We demonstrate the requirement of phosphorylation at distinct tyrosine motifs within the MUC1.CT for MUC1-induced CTGF expression and demonstrate a phosphorylation-specific localization of MUC1.CT to the CTGF promoter. We found that MUC1 reorganizes transcription factor occupancy of genomic regions upstream of the CTGF gene, directing β-catenin and mutant p53 to CTGF gene regulatory elements to promote CTGF expression and destabilizing the interaction at these regions of the transcriptional repressor, c-Jun. With this example we illustrate the capacity of MUC1.CT to mediate transcription factor activity in a context-dependent manner to achieve wide spread and robust changes in gene expression and facilitate creation of the reactive tumor microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>20537384<newchar>Injured peripheral nerve tissue could benefit from biomaterial nerve guidance conduits (NGCs) that are designed to promote neuronal regeneration. Nerve regeneration is a complex multi-step process that involves the remodeling of the ECM surrounding the regenerating neural tissue. Hydrogel biomaterials have been used as provisional matrices to regulate this regeneration process by providing the desired physical properties and controllable degradation characteristics. The purpose of this investigation was to understand the mechanism by which nerve cells penetrate into a hydrogel made from PEGylated fibrinogen. In this context, the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) assay was used as an in vitro model to study the cellular invasion behavior of both neural and nonneuronal cells. Our hypothesis stipulated that DRG cells employ matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in order to degrade the dense hydrogel matrix and penetrate the biomaterial. Three dimensional (3D) DRG-hydrogel constructs were cultured with MMP inhibitors (MMPi) and the effect of the inhibitors on DRG cell outgrowth was investigated. We also examined the effect of inhibitors on two dimensional (2D) DRG cell outgrowth on PEGylated fibrinogen hydrogels and on tissue culture polystyrene (TCP). Our results demonstrate that DRG cell outgrowth into and onto PEGylated fibrinogen hydrogels was inhibited by MMPi and that the outgrowth characteristics was dependent on the type of inhibitor and its concentration. MMP-3i and MMP-8i decreased both neuronal and nonneuronal outgrowth, where MMP-3i had a stronger inhibitory effect on nonneuronal cells. MMP-2/9i, on the other hand, affected the neuronal outgrowth much more than the others. We concluded that MMPs play a central role in the process of DRG cell penetration into PEGylated fibrinogen hydrogels and may also regulate the adhesion, migration and elongation of neuronal cells on the surface of these hydrogel biomaterials.<newchar><newabs>11212845<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are a family of zinc-dependent enzymes which degrade various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and play an important role in facilitating neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Structural changes in the extracellular matrix are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and tumor invasion. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in both spontaneous and xenografted (cells derived from an established cell-line [DAOY#3]) childhood medulloblastomas (MEDs)/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunocytochemical technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed tissue that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin (SL), types 1 (MMP-3) and 2 (MMP-10), share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found only in the spontaneous MEDs/PNETs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells in the spontaneous cases, and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Focal (surrounding less than 10% of the neoplastically transformed cells) but strong (A,B) immunoreactivity for collagenase-3 (MMP-13) was also only detected in spontaneous MEDs/PNETs, an endopeptidase characterized by a potent degrading activity against a wide spectrum of substrates. Weak (surrounding anywhere between 10% and 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells, and of B and B,C intensity) expression of MMP-2 (gelatinase A) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B), two cytokine-induced MMPs, was also observed in the spontaneous cases. Staining for MMP-2 was negative in the xenografted MEDs/PNETs. The only positive immunoreactivity in the xenografted MEDs/PNETs was observed in the case of MMP-9, with expression of strong intensity in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed xenografted MED/PNET cells (++++; A,B). It is clear that the activation of MMPs and their inhibitors occurs in a very well orchestrated manner. The data presented here suggest that there are significant differences in the pathophysiology of spontaneous and xenografted human neoplasms, which further establishes the already detected limitations of such models in preclinical cancer research.<newchar><newabs>21410430<newchar>Mast cells, traditionally regarded as effector cells of the immune system, have more recently been demonstrated to be key figures in initiating, developing and sustaining complex pathophysiological processes underlying asthma and other allergic diseases. Asthma is characterised by airway inflammation alongside a disturbance to airway physiology manifesting as variable airflow obstruction and airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR). Evidence has emerged that mast cells influence airway function by forming close intercellular relationships with different structural components of the airway wall. In asthma, mast cells are seen to localise to the airway epithelium, to mucous glands and to the airway smooth muscle (ASM). It is mast cell-ASM interaction that is most fundamental to the asthma phenotype and many mast cell mediators have been demonstrated to have important effects on ASM function. In asthma, alongside the inflammatory and physiological changes, structural changes occur to the airway wall in the form of denudation of the epithelium, goblet cell and mucous gland hyperplasia, subepithelial fibrosis, abnormal extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, vascular proliferation and increased ASM mass. There are many ways in which mast cells can contribute to these structural changes through direct cell to cell communication and more indirectly through mediator release. Mast cells exhibit an array of diverse functions and roles and are fundamental to our current understanding of asthma pathogenesis including severe asthma. Novel targeting of mast cells and their mediators therefore should offer significant therapeutic potential in the treatment of asthma.<newchar><newabs>19682489<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) and a complex interplay of cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix (ECM) interactions provide important platforms to determine cellular senescence and a potentially tumorigenic transformation of normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). An enhanced formation of extracellular filaments, consisting of elastin-like structures, in senescent post-selection HMEC populations was paralleled by a significantly increased expression of its precursor protein tropoelastin and matched with a markedly elevated activity of the cross-linking enzyme family of lysyl oxidases (LOX). RNAi experiments revealed both the ECM metalloproteinase MMP-7 and the growth factor HB-EGF as potential effectors of an increased tropoelastin expression. Moreover, co-localization of MMP-7 and HB-EGF as well as a concomittant downstream signaling via Fra-1 indicated a possible association between the reduced MMP-7 enzyme activity and an impaired HB-EGF processing, resulting in an enhanced tropoelastin synthesis during senescence of HMEC. In agreement with previous work, these findings suggested an important influence of the extracellular proteinase MMP-7 on the aging process of HMEC, affecting both extracellular remodeling as well as intracellular signaling pathways.<newchar><newabs>18993041<newchar>Renal interstitial fibrosis is a major complication of cisplatin treatment, due to the increased accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins whose remodeling is important for the development of normal tissues; indeed, its malfunction might play a role in the etiology of various diseases. Biopharmacological evaluations suggest that L-carnitine can prevent cardiac metabolic damage caused by doxorubicin, as well as can inhibit cisplatin-induced injury in the kidney and in the small intestine, without any interference with the drug's antitumoral properties. Since the glomerular basement membrane and the mesangial matrix constitute the ECM of the renal glomerulus, we examined the localization and expression of MMP-9 and TIMP-3 in normal rat kidney and the changes in their expression over a period of time by treatment with cisplatin, with and without L-carnitine. MMP-9 immunoreaction in cisplatin-treated rat kidney tissue suggests an involution of the basal membrane, an alteration of ECM components and low glomerular function, due to the increased thickness of the mesangium. Our results suggest that the matrix remodeling by MMP-9 and TIMP-3, in the later stages, can play an important role in the development of glomerular sclerosis and interstitial fibrosis after cisplatin treatment. It can also be postulated that L-carnitine protects from cisplatin injury, by modulating the relationship between MMP-9 and TIMP-3.<newchar><newabs>20307924<newchar>Dysregulation of matrix synthesis during myocardial fibrosis in post-infarct ventricular remodeling contributes to ventricular dysfunction. Bone marrow stem cell transplantation prevents functional deterioration following myocardial infarction. However, effect of myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) on stem cell differentiation is poorly understood. We investigate the role of collagen matrices and integrin system in cardiac differentiation and engraftment of stem cells in infarcted myocardium. Sternum-derived bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were differentiated into cardiomyocyte-like cells (CLCs). They were characterized using RT-PCR, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry and functional integrin neutralization assays. CLCs were injected into peri-infarct borders of injured myocardium of Wistar rats one week following left anterior descending (LAD) artery ligation. Cardiac function was analyzed via pressure-volume relationships. Cardiac differentiated CLCs displayed collagen V specificity, which was absent in undifferentiated MSCs. Collagen V, but not collagen I matrix, promoted attachment, proliferation and cardiac differentiation of CLCs. In contrast to beta(1), alpha(v) integrin contributed minimally in the attachment of CLCs on collagen matrices. However, inhibition of alpha(v)beta(3,) but not alpha(2)beta(1) integrin, selectively attenuated troponin T, sarcomeric alpha-actin and ryanodine 2 receptor gene expression in CLCs. Both MSC and CLC transplantation prevented chamber dilatation and improved contractile function. However, systolic activity in MSC transplanted animals was accompanied by heightened wall stress as demonstrated by elevated myocardial end-diastolic pressure and prolonged tissue relaxation time. Localization of CLCs in the vicinity of collagen V-expressing myofibers promoted their integration into cardiac syncytium. CLCs may facilitate hemodynamic recovery by preserving tissue elasticity in the peri-infarct borders that sustains contractile efficiency for functional recovery in an actively remodeling infarcted myocardium.<newchar><newabs>19609047<newchar>It has been suggested that matrix-metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) play a major role in the regulation of myocardial remodeling. Myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) is highly susceptible to ischemic injury in acute myocardial infarction (AMI).We measured serum levels of TIMP-1 in the early hours of AMI to study the kinetics of these enzymes in an early ischemic phase.TIMP-1 was measured in 25 patients with AMI and 116 healthy controls. Blood samples were obtained during the first 12 hours after hospital admission. Left ventricular function (LVF) and hemodynamic data were collected during coronary intervention.TIMP-1 was significantly elevated in patients with AMI within the first hours compared to controls (P&lt;0.05). No significant difference was observed between patients with preserved LVF and with impaired LVF. Elevated TIMP-1 levels did not correlate with increased levels of CK or CK-MB band during the first hours after AMI.Increased TIMP-1 can be detected within 12 hours in patients with AMI, suggesting early onset of remodeling. Elevation of TIMP-1 may be a surrogate marker for increased ECM-turnover. The prognostic relevance needs to be proved in long-term studies.<newchar><newabs>10770255<newchar>Vascular hypertrophy, which is characterized by proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) and accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM), is a major pathological change in blood vessels after chronic exposure to hypertension. Blood pressure is transmitted to the arterial walls and counterbalanced by mechanical stress, leading to stretching of circumferentially oriented VSMC, which may play some role in the pathogenesis of vascular hypertrophy. The present study was designed, therefore, to investigate the effect of mechanical stretch on the expression of ECM components and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), a potent stimulator for ECM production, and to examine the signal transduction mechanisms of the induction of TGF-beta in cultured rat VSMC. VSMC were subjected to cyclic stretch to provide a maximal elongation of 20% at a rate of 60 cycles per minute for up to 24 h. Mechanical stretch stimulated TGF-beta1 mRNA expression in a time- and elongation-dependent manner. Indeed, the secretion of TGF-beta proteins into the culture media was increased after stretch. Stretch also stimulated mRNA expression of the ECM components, type I and type IV collagen, and fibronectin, which was largely inhibited by addition of neutralizing antibody against TGF-beta. The tyrosine kinase inhibitors genistein and herbimycin A blocked the induction of TGF-beta1 and type I collagen by stretch, while protein kinase C inhibitors, the calcium channel blockers nitrendipine and gadolinium, or Ca removal from the media had no effect. These results suggest that stretch-induced, tyrosine kinase-mediated autocrine/paracrine production of TGF-8 may play a critical role in the progression of vascular remodeling associated with high blood pressure.<newchar><newabs>17942798<newchar>The resumption of oocyte meiosis in mammals encompasses the landmark event of oocyte germinal vesicle (GV) breakdown (GVBD), accompanied by the modification of cell-to-cell communication and adhesion between the oocyte and surrounding cumulus cells. The concomitant cumulus expansion relies on microfilament-cytoskeletal remodeling and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. We hypothesized that this multifaceted remodeling event requires substrate-specific proteolysis by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP). We evaluated meiotic progression, cytoskeletal dynamics, and the production of cumulus ECM in porcine cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) cultured with or without 10-200 microM MG132, a specific proteasomal inhibitor, for the first 22 h of in vitro maturation, followed by 22 h of culture with or without MG132. Treatment with 10 microM MG132 arrested 28.4% of oocytes in GV stage (vs. 1.3% in control), 43.1% in prometaphase I, and 16.2% in metaphase I, whereas 83.7% of control ova reached metaphase II (0% of MG132 reached metaphase II). The proportion of GV-stage ova increased progressively to &gt;90% with increased concentration of MG132 (20-200 microM). Furthermore, MG132 blocked the extrusion of the first polar body and degradation of F-actin-rich transzonal projections (TZP) interconnecting cumulus cells with the oocyte. The microfilament disruptor cytochalasin E (CE) prevented cumulus expansion but accelerated the breakdown of TZPs. Ova treated with a combination of 10 microM MG132 and 10 microM CE underwent GVBD, despite the inhibition of proteasomal activity. However, 90.0% of cumulus-free ova treated with 10 microM MG132 remained in GV stage, compared with 16.7% GV ova in control. Cumulus expansion, retention of hyaluronic acid, and the deposition of cumulus ECM relying on the covalent transfer of heavy chains of inter-alpha trypsin inhibitor (IalphaI) were also inhibited by MG132. Cumulus expansion in control COCs was accompanied by the degradation of ubiquitin-C-terminal hydrolase L3, an important regulator of UPP. RAC1, a UPP-controlled regulator of actin polymerization was maintained at steady levels throughout cumulus expansion. We conclude that proteasomal proteolysis has multiple functions in the progression of oocyte meiosis beyond GV and metaphase I stage, polar body extrusion, and cumulus expansion.<newchar><newabs>17602244<newchar>Matrix remodeling is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Periostin, originally identified in a mouse osteoblastic library, plays a role in cell adhesion and migration and in mechanical stress-induced matrix remodeling. In this study, we analyzed and compared the distribution patterns of TIMP-2 and periostin during mouse mandible development. Immunohistochemical staining for TIMP-2 and periostin was carried out on serial cryosections obtained from mice at embryonic days 13-16, postnatal day 2 (P2), P35, and 12 weeks of age. TIMP-2 and periostin exhibited a strikingly similar protein distribution during mandible development. From bud to early bell stages of molars, TIMP-2 and periostin were highly expressed on the lingual and anterior sides of the basement membrane and on the adjacent jaw mesenchyme. In pre- and postnatal incisors, the basement membrane of the apical loop and dental follicle was immunostained for TIMP-2 and periostin. At postnatal stages, TIMP-2 and periostin were prominently confined to the extracellular matrix (ECM) of gingival tissues, periodontal ligaments, and tendons (all recipients of mechanical strain). However, periostin was solely detected in the lower portion of the inner root sheath of hair follicles. Gingiva of P2 cultured in anti-TIMP-2 antibody-conditioned medium showed markedly reduced staining of periostin. We suggest that TIMP-2 and periostin are co-distributed on ECM exposed to mechanical forces and coordinately function as ECM modulators.<newchar><newabs>19389798<newchar>The prototypic long PTX3 is a multifunctional protein involved in innate resistance to pathogens and in controlling inflammation. TSG-6 is a hyaluronan-binding protein that is involved in ECM remodeling and has anti-inflammatory and chondroprotective functions. PTX3 and TSG-6 are coregulated by growth differentiation factor-9 in granulosa cells, where they are produced during the periovulatory period and play essential roles in the incorporation of hyaluronan into the ECM during cumulus expansion. The present study was designed to assess whether PTX3 and TSG-6 are coregulated in leukocytes, in particular, in phagocytes and DC. Monocytes, macrophages, and myeloid DC were found to produce high levels of TSG-6 and PTX3 in response to proinflammatory mediators (LPS or cytokines). Unstimulated neutrophil polymorphonuclear granulocytes expressed high levels of TSG-6 mRNA, but not PTX3 transcript, and stored both proteins in granules. In contrast, endothelial cells expressed substantial amounts of PTX3 mRNA and low levels of TSG-6 transcript under the conditions tested. Anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-4, dampened LPS-induced TSG-6 and PTX3 expression. Divergent effects were observed with IL-10, which synergizes with TLR-mediated PTX3 induction but inhibits LPS-induced TSG-6 transcription. Immunohistochemical analysis confirms the colocalization of the two proteins in inflammatory infiltrates and in endothelial cells of inflamed tissues. Thus, here we show that myelomonocytic cells and MoDC are a major source of TSG-6 and that PTX3 and TSG-6 are coregulated under most of the conditions tested. The coordinated expression of PTX3 and TSG-6 may play a role in ECM remodeling at sites of inflammation.<newchar><newabs>19796726<newchar>In normal pregnancy, the cervix maintains its shape during a period of substantial fetal and uterine growth. Hence, maintenance of biomechanical integrity is an important aspect of cervical function. It is known that cervical mechanical properties arise from extracellular matrix (ECM). The most important constituent of the cervical ECM is fibrillar collagen-it is collagen protein that the cervix derives its &quot;strength&quot; from. Other matrix molecules known to affect the collagen network include water, proteoglycans, hyaluronan, and elastin. The objective of this review is to discuss relationships between biochemical constituents and macroscopic mechanical properties. The individual constituents of the ECM will be discussed, especially in regard to collagen remodeling during pregnancy. In addition, the macroscopic mechanical properties of cervical tissue will be reviewed. An improved understanding of the biochemistry of cervical &quot;strength&quot; will shed light on how the cervix maintains its shape in normal pregnancy and shortens in preterm birth.<newchar><newabs>17181131<newchar>The remodeling of extracellular matrices by cells plays a defining role in developmental morphogenesis and wound healing as well as in tissue engineering. Three-dimensional (3-D) type I collagen matrices have been used extensively as an in vitro model for studying cell-induced matrix reorganization at the macroscopic level. However, few studies have directly assessed the process of 3-D extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling at the cellular and subcellular level. In this study, we directly compare two imaging modalities for both quantitative and qualitative imaging of 3-D collagen organization in vitro: differential interference contrast (DIC) and confocal reflectance imaging. The results demonstrate that two-dimensional (2-D) DIC images allow visualization of the same population of collagen fibrils as observed in 2-D confocal reflectance images. Thus, DIC can be used for qualitative assessment of fibril organization, as well as tracking of fibril movement in sequential time-lapse 2-D images. However, we also found that quantitative techniques that can be applied to confocal reflectance images, such as Fourier transform analysis, give different results when applied to DIC images. Furthermore, common techniques used for 3-D visualization and reconstruction of confocal reflectance datasets are not generally applicable to DIC. Overall, obtaining a complete understanding of cell-matrix mechanical interactions will likely require a combination of both wide-field DIC imaging to study rapid changes in ECM deformation which can occur within minutes, and confocal reflectance imaging to assess more gradual changes in cell-induced compaction and alignment of ECM which occur over a longer time course.<newchar><newabs>17975115<newchar>The mouse heart is a target of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) during fetal development, and microarray analysis demonstrates significant changes in expression of cardiac genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. We tested the hypothesis that developmental TCDD exposure would disrupt cardiac ECM expression and be associated with changes in cardiac morphology in adulthood. In one study, time-pregnant C57BL/6 mice were dosed with corn oil or 1.5, 3.0, or 6.0 microg TCDD/kg on gestation day (GD) 14.5 and sacrificed on GD 17.5, when changes in fetal cardiac mRNA expression were analyzed using quantitative PCR. TCDD induced mRNA expression of genes associated with ECM remodeling (matrix metalloproteinase 9 and 13, preproendothelin-1 [preproET-1]), cardiac hypertrophy (atrial natriuretic peptide, beta-myosin heavy chain, osteopontin), and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activation (cytochrome P4501A1, AHR repressor). Further, all TCDD-induced changes required the AHR since gene expression was not altered in AHR knockout fetuses. In a second study, time-pregnant mice were treated with corn oil or 6.0 microg TCDD/kg on GD 14.5, and male offspring were assessed for changes in cardiac gene expression and cardiac and renal morphology at 3 months. All TCDD-induced changes in cardiac gene expression observed fetally, except for preproET-1, remained induced in the hearts of adult male offspring. Adult male offspring of TCDD-exposed dams also displayed cardiac hypertrophy, decreased plasma volume, and mild hydronephrosis. These results demonstrate that in utero and lactational TCDD exposures alter cardiac gene expression and cardiac and renal morphology in adulthood, which may increase the susceptibility to cardiovascular dysfunction.<newchar><newabs>20709392<newchar>Cytokine-mediated inflammation and abruption-induced thrombin generation are separately implicated in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-mediated weakening of fetal membranes (FM) leading to preterm premature rupture of the fetal membranes (PPROM). At term, FM of both labored vaginal and unlabored Cesarean deliveries exhibit a weak zone overlying the cervix exhibiting ECM remodeling characterized by increased MMP9 protein and activity. We have reproduced these biochemical changes as well as FM weakening in vitro using tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) and interleukin (IL)-1β, inflammatory cytokines implicated in PPROM. Additionally, we have reported that the antioxidant and NFκB inhibitor alpha-lipoic Acid (LA) blocks these TNF-induced effects. We now present the first direct evidence that thrombin also can induce FM weakening in vitro, and LA treatment inhibits this thrombin-induced-weakening. Full thickness FM fragments from unlabored Cesarean deliveries were incubated with increasing doses of thrombin (0-100 u/ml) for 48 h. Fragments were then strength tested (breaking force and work to rupture) using our published methodology. MMP3 and 9 levels in tissue extracts were determined by Western blot and densitometry. To determine the effect of LA, FM fragments were incubated with control medium or 10 u/ml thrombin, with or without 0.25 mM LA. Strength testing and MMP induction were determined. Thrombin induced a dose-dependent decrease in FM strength (42% baseline rupture force and 45% work to rupture) coupled with a dose-dependent increase in MMP3 and 9 expression (all p &lt; 0.001). Treatment of FM with 0.25 mM LA completely inhibited thrombin-induced FM weakening and MMP expression (all p &lt; 0.001). Thrombin treatment of cultured FM induces mechanical weakening and increased MMP3 and 9. Treatment of FM with LA inhibits these thrombin-induced effects. We speculate LA may prove clinically useful in prevention of PPROM associated with abruption.<newchar><newabs>17070551<newchar>Varicose veins have a wide prevalence and are characterized by their tortuous, dilated, and serpentine appearance. This pattern is the result of disruption of the normal arrangement of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and smooth muscle cells (SMC) in veins. Valvular incompetence and the effect of increased hydrostatic pressure have been implicated in the pathogenesis of varicose veins. Alterations in the ECM and varied expression of metalloproteinases and their inhibitors can effect changes in venous wall remodeling. Gene expression and specific candidate markers have been identified in varicose veins. Differential gene transcription may influence the adaptive response of the venous wall to stimuli and the remodeling of the ECM that leads to the development of varicose veins.<newchar><newabs>15785871<newchar>Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the primary tumor type in head and neck cancer. Typically, these tumor cells show persistent invasion that frequently leads to local recurrence and distant lymphatic metastasis. The process of invasion involves concurrent infiltration and destruction of adjacent tissues. As with normal mucosal epithelium, SCC cells express receptors that mediate cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion (integrins) and cell-cell adhesion (cadherins). Both receptor families represent important signaling devices that are capable of promoting survival and proliferation. Recent results indicate that integrins and cadherins cooperate to regulate invasive behavior. During SCC invasion, cells actively migrate through the surrounding ECM with the simultaneous remodeling of their intercellular adhesions. During invasion, integrin receptor engagement with specific ECM ligands along with concurrent remodeling of cadherin adhesions induces changes in the cytoskeleton though modulation of the activities of Rho family members. Tumor development and progression of SCC proceeds with the generation of variant cells with potential alterations in expression of adhesion receptors, and their associated signaling pathways lead to a highly invasive and metastatic phenotype. Understanding the molecular events that define this subset of invasive cells will facilitate the development of new treatment strategies.<newchar><newabs>16488165<newchar>The reconstruction of extracellular matrix (ECM) by confocal reflection microscopy is a physical approach for monitoring the ECM structure, cell-matrix interactions and changes of ECM structure over time. We here show that confocal reflection imaging is useful in reconstructing the fibrillar architecture of 3D fibrin lattices and fibroblasts embedded therein at high resolution up to 250 nm. Together with confocal fluorescence microscopy of collagen deposited by fibroblasts, this technique allows the monitoring of fibrin remodeling by stromal cells. In conclusion, confocal reflection microscopy is a valuable technique for real-time monitoring of the remodeling of fibrin matrices, such as during thrombus formation, wound healing, and tumor formation.<newchar><newabs>10497280<newchar>Substitute heart valves composed of human or animal tissues have been used since the early 1960s, when aortic valves obtained fresh from human cadavers were transplanted to other individuals as allografts. Today, tissue valves are used in 40% or more of valve replacements worldwide, predominantly as stented porcine aortic valves (PAV) and bovine pericardial valves (BPV) preserved by glutaraldehyde (GLUT) (collectively termed bioprostheses). The principal disadvantage of tissue valves is progressive calcific and noncalcific deterioration, limiting durability. Native heart valves (typified by the aortic valve) are cellular and layered, with regional specializations of the extracellular matrix (ECM). These elements facilitate marked repetitive changes in shape and dimension throughout the cardiac cycle, effective stress transfer to the adjacent aortic wall, and ongoing repair of injury incurred during normal function. Although GLUT bioprostheses mimic natural aortic valve structure (a) their cells are nonviable and thereby incapable of normal turnover or remodeling ECM proteins; (b) their cuspal microstructure is locked into a configuration which is at best characteristic of one phase of the cardiac cycle (usually diastole); and (c) their mechanical properties are markedly different from those of natural aortic valve cusps. Consequently, tissue valves suffer a high rate of progressive and age-dependent structural valve deterioration resulting in stenosis or regurgitation (&gt;50% of PAV overall fail within 10-15 years; the failure rate is nearly 100% in 5 years in those &lt;35 years old but only 10% in 10 years in those &gt;65). Two distinct processes-intrinsic calcification and noncalcific degradation of the ECM-account for structural valve deterioration. Calcification is a direct consequence of the inability of the nonviable cells of the GLUT-preserved tissue to maintain normally low intracellular calcium. Consequently, nucleation of calcium-phosphate crystals occurs at the phospholipid-rich membranes and their remnants. Collagen and elastin also calcify. Tissue valve mineralization has complex host, implant, and mechanical determinants. Noncalcific degradation in the absence of physiological repair mechanisms of the valvular structural matrix is increasingly being appreciated as a critical yet independent mechanism of valve deterioration. These degradation mechanisms are largely rationalized on the basis of the changes to natural valves when they are fabricated into a tissue valve (mentioned above), and the subsequent interactions with the physiologic environment that are induced following implantation. The &quot;Holy Grail&quot; is a nonobstructive, nonthrombogenic tissue valve which will last the lifetime of the patient (and potentially grow in maturing recipients). There is considerable activity in basic research, industrial development, and clinical investigation to improve tissue valves. Particularly exciting in concept, yet early in practice is tissue engineering, a technique in which an anatomically appropriate construct containing cells seeded on a resorbable scaffold is fabricated in vitro, then implanted. Remodeling in vivo, stimulated and guided by appropriate biological signals incorporated into the construct, is intended to recapitulate normal functional architecture.<newchar><newabs>15258769<newchar>Adhesive and proteolytic interactions of cells with components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are fundamental to morphogenesis, tissue assembly and remodeling, and cell migration as well as signal acquisition from tissue-bound factors. The visualization from fixed samples provides snapshot-like, static information on the cellular and molecular dynamics of adhesion receptor and protease functions toward ECM, such as interstitial fibrillar tissues and basement membranes. Recent technological developments additionally support the dynamic imaging of ECM scaffolds and the interaction behavior of cells contained therein. These include differential interference contrast, confocal reflection microscopy, optical coherence tomography, and multiphoton microscopy and second-harmonic generation imaging. Most of these approaches are combined with fluorescence imaging using derivates of GFP and/or other fluorescent dyes. Dynamic 3D imaging has revealed an unexpected degree of dynamics and turnover of cell adhesion and migration as well as basic mechanisms that lead to proteolytic remodeling of connective tissue by stromal cells and invading tumor cells.<newchar><newabs>10719361<newchar>Injury to the CNS induces complex cellular and molecular interactions referred to as reactive gliosis. Alterations in the extracellular microenvironment associated with the gliotic response are believed to be the primary cause of regenerative failure of the mature CNS. For injured neurons to reestablish severed connections their processes must explore the extracellular milieu. Thus far, experiments have focused on extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins whose expression is upregulated after CNS injury and that exert inhibitory effects on neurite outgrowth. An intricate balance between ECM synthesis and degradation must be maintained during the tissue remodeling associated with injury. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are believed to be the main mediators of ECM degradation. MMP activity is tightly regulated by interaction with tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). To determine whether TIMPs are expressed during injury-induced matrix remodeling, TIMP expression was examined during reactive gliosis. A stab injury to the mature rat brain leads to the differential regulation of TIMP mRNA expression. Timp-1 and Timp-2 mRNA are significantly upregulated after injury, while the expression of Timp-3 and Timp-4 is unaltered. The expression of Timp-1 in reactive astrocytes and Timp-2 in microglia and neurons suggests these TIMPs may serve distinct functions in response to injury.<newchar><newabs>15699160<newchar>Altered airway smooth muscle (ASM) function and enrichment of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with interstitial collagen and fibronectin are major pathological features of airway remodeling in asthma. We have previously shown that these ECM components confer enhanced ASM proliferation in vitro, but their action on its newly characterized secretory function is unknown. Here, we examined the effects of fibronectin and collagen types I, III, and V on IL-1beta-dependent secretory responses of human ASM cells, and characterized the involvement of specific integrins. Cytokine production (eotaxin, RANTES, and GM-CSF) was evaluated by ELISA, RT-PCR, and flow cytometry. Function-blocking integrin mAbs and RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp)-blocking peptides were used to identify integrin involvement. IL-1beta-dependent release of eotaxin, RANTES, and GM-CSF was enhanced by fibronectin and by fibrillar and monomeric type I collagen, with similar changes in mRNA abundance. Collagen types III and V had no effect on eotaxin or RANTES release but did modulate GM-CSF. Analogous changes in intracellular cytokine accumulation were found, but in &lt;25% of the total ASM cell population. Function-blocking Ab and RGD peptide studies revealed that alpha2beta1, alpha5beta1, alphavbeta1, and alphavbeta3 integrins were required for up-regulation of IL-1beta-dependent ASM secretory responses by fibronectin, while alpha2beta1 was an important transducer for type I collagen. Thus, fibronectin and type I collagen enhance IL-1beta-dependent ASM secretory responses through a beta1 integrin-dependent mechanism. Enhancement of cytokine release from ASM by these ECM components may contribute to airway wall inflammation and remodeling in asthma.<newchar><newabs>10593948<newchar>Proteolytic degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components during tissue remodeling plays a pivotal role in normal and pathological processes including wound healing, inflammation, tumor invasion, and metastasis. Proteolytic enzymes in tumors may activate or release growth factors from the ECM or act directly on the ECM itself, thereby facilitating angiogenesis or tumor cell migration. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is a cell surface antigen of reactive tumor stromal fibroblasts found in epithelial cancers and in granulation tissue during wound healing. It is absent from most normal adult human tissues. FAP is conserved throughout chordate evolution, with homologues in mouse and Xenopus laevis, whose expression correlates with tissue remodeling events. Using recombinant and purified natural FAP, we show that FAP has both dipeptidyl peptidase activity and a collagenolytic activity capable of degrading gelatin and type I collagen; by sequence, FAP belongs to the serine protease family rather than the matrix metalloprotease family. Mutation of the putative catalytic serine residue of FAP to alanine abolishes both enzymatic activities. Consistent with its in vivo expression pattern determined by immunohistochemistry, FAP enzyme activity was detected by an immunocapture assay in human cancerous tissues but not in matched normal tissues. This study demonstrates that FAP is present as an active cell surface-bound collagenase in epithelial tumor stroma and opens up investigation into physiological substrates of its novel, tumor-associated dipeptidyl peptidase activity.<newchar><newabs>17108870<newchar>Different event is a process that is dependent on stimulation of extracellular signals, signal transduction and gene express. Malignant transformation of hepatocytes may occur in cirrhosis, which is the result of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. ECM could affect and maintain the differentiated phenotype of hepatocytes by regulating liver transcription factors. Moreover, ECM remodeling is correlated with dedifferentiation of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Integrin-matrix adhesion system and E-cadherin/catenin adhesion complex mediate the cell-matrix interaction through focal adhesion kinase, extracellular-signal-regulated kinases and beta catenin/Wnt pathway. The different event of HCC compared with the reversion of abnormal cell-matrix interaction. New drugs that are power for regulating cell-matrix interaction may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for HCC.<newchar><newabs>17855768<newchar>Hemodynamic shear stress regulates endothelial cell biochemical processes that govern cytoskeletal contractility, focal adhesion dynamics, and extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly. Since shear stress causes rapid strain focusing at discrete locations in the cytoskeleton, we hypothesized that shear stress coordinately alters structural dynamics in the cytoskeleton, focal adhesion sites, and ECM on a time scale of minutes. Using multiwavelength four-dimensional fluorescence microscopy, we measured the displacement of rhodamine-fibronectin and green fluorescent protein-labeled actin, vimentin, paxillin, and/or vinculin in aortic endothelial cells before and after onset of steady unidirectional shear stress. In the cytoskeleton, the onset of shear stress increased actin polymerization into lamellipodia, altered the angle of lateral displacement of actin stress fibers and vimentin filaments, and decreased centripetal remodeling of actin stress fibers in subconfluent and confluent cell layers. Shear stress induced the formation of new focal complexes and reduced the centripetal remodeling of focal adhesions in regions of new actin polymerization. The structural dynamics of focal adhesions and the fibronectin matrix varied with cell density. In subconfluent cell layers, shear stress onset decreased the displacement of focal adhesions and fibronectin fibrils. In confluent monolayers, the direction of fibronectin and focal adhesion displacement shifted significantly toward the downstream direction within 1 min after onset of shear stress. These spatially coordinated rapid changes in the structural dynamics of cytoskeleton, focal adhesions, and ECM are consistent with focusing of mechanical stress and/or strain near major sites of shear stress-mediated mechanotransduction.<newchar><newabs>19299064<newchar>In this review, we describe a new model to explain the regulation of myometrial function during pregnancy and labour. We propose that the myometrium undergoes dramatic changes in phenotype from early pregnancy until the onset of labour, characterized by an early proliferative phase, an intermediate phase of cellular hypertrophy and matrix elaboration, a third phase in which the cells assume a contractile phenotype and the final phase in which cells become highly active and committed to labour. The last phase of myometrial differentiation is postpartum uterine involution, completing the reproductive cycle following pregnancy and labour by returning the uterus to its non-pregnant receptive state. We further propose that phenotypic modulation of the uterine myocytes is the result of integration of endocrine signals and mechanical stimulation of the uterus by the growing fetus. Our previous studies have shown that these signals are important in regulating the onset of labour and we now have indications that they regulate earlier myometrial smooth muscle differentiation. We show that the high rate of myometrial cell proliferation in early pregnancy which reflects important aspects of many smooth muscle populations during development. The proliferative phenotype was associated with dramatic changes in the expression of IGF family proteins and coincided with an up-regulation of the anti-apoptotic pathway. Preliminary evidence suggests that myometrial hyperplasia was controlled by the PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway. The modulation of the mTOR pathway by rapamycin blocked the proliferative activity of the uterine myocytes. The growth and remodeling of the myometrium during pregnancy was associated with increased synthesis of extra cellular matrix (ECM) proteins and their corresponding integrin receptors. Our results show a decrease in expression of fibrillar collagens and a coordinated temporal increase in expression of components of the basement membrane near term associated with decreased progesterone levels and increased mechanical tension. The phenotypic modulation of uterine smooth muscle cells during pregnancy culminates at term when a myometrium-specific conversion commits these cells to the labour phenotype, characterized by increased excitability, spontaneous activity, responsiveness to agonists and effective coupling of the myocytes. The reinforcement of the ECM-integrin interaction contributes to myometrial hypertrophy and remodeling during late pregnancy and facilitates force transduction during the contractions of labour by anchoring hypertrophied SMCs to the uterine ECM. In addition, we suggest that myometrial cells play an important role in the generation and regulation of uterine inflammation, which is a characteristic feature of parturition. We provide here substantial evidence that myometrial cells can actively participate in the inflammatory process in the uterus by the release of the pro-inflammatory chemokine MCP-1. The increased production of MCP-1 in the term myometrium was associated with uterine occupancy and regulated by progesterone, suggesting that mechanical and endocrine signals integrate to regulate the expression of the chemokine and the induction of labour. A better understanding of the mechanisms regulating myometrial differentiation during pregnancy might inform the development of new therapeutic strategies for the management of preterm labour, which remains a leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Our data are obtained mostly from the rat, but we believe that they are generally applicable across species.<newchar><newabs>12351448<newchar>Pathological remodeling characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition contributes to the diabetic vascular complications. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) regulate ECM turnover. However, the expression profile of the MMP system in diabetic human tissue remains unknown. The objectives of this study were 1) to identify a local MMP induction/activation system that exists in arterial vasculature and 2) to determine how the MMP system may be altered in diabetes. Internal mammary artery specimens were obtained from patients who did (n = 14) and did not (n = 14) have diabetes and were undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting surgery. ECM inducer protein (EMMPRIN); membrane-type MMP (MT-MMP); and MMP-1, -2, and -9 were quantified by immunoblotting and densitometric scanning (pixels). Pro-MMP-1 and MMP-2 levels were decreased from 952 +/- 120 and 1,081 +/- 508 pixels, respectively, in nondiabetic tissue to 398 +/- 62 and 249 +/- 42 pixels in the diabetic tissue (P &lt; 0.05). Both EMMPRIN and MT-MMP expression and total MMP activity were decreased by twofold in diabetic patients (P &lt; 0.05). These results demonstrated for the first time that an MMP induction and activation system exists in human arterial vasculature and that it is downregulated in diabetes. Decreased MMP activity may contribute to increased collagen deposition and pathological remodeling in diabetes.<newchar><newabs>16493582<newchar>Turnover balance of extracellular matrix (ECM) is a prerequisite for the structural and functional homeostasis of bone marrow (BM) microenvironment. The role of ECM in physiologic hematopoiesis and its pathologic change in hematopoietic malignancies are very important and under extensive investigation. Accumulating evidence suggests that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of zinc-dependent proteinases, take an active part in the physiological and pathological hematopoiesis through remodeling the ECM in BM hematopoietic microenvironment. In this review, we will focus on the roles of MMPs in physiological hematopoiesis, hematopoietic stem cells mobilization/transplantation, and hematological malignancies. Furthermore, the preclinical studies on the role of synthetic MMP inhibitors in the treatment of hematological malignancies will be discussed.<newchar><newabs>20396502<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in the pathophysiology of several central nervous system diseases that share common pathogeneses, such as disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In early ischemic injury, MMPs participate in disruption of the BBB by digesting the basal lamina of capillaries and ECM, leading to vasogenic edema and hemorrhagic transformation. However, ECM degradation and remodeling are essential for tissue recovery, with MMPs having a key role as modulators of homeostasis between neuronal death and tissue regeneration. Thus, MMPs may be a double-edged sword that has a deleterious or beneficial role depending on the stage of brain injury.<newchar>Cerebral ischemia<n-term>Extracellular matrix<n-term>Matrix metalloproteinase<n-term>Stroke<n-term><newabs>11112129<newchar>Airway remodeling is a key feature of persistent asthma. Part of the remodeling process involves the laying down of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins within the airways. In this study we compared the production of ECM proteins by human airway smooth-muscle (ASM) cells in culture after exposure to 10% serum from an asthmatic individual or 10% serum from a nonasthmatic individual with or without beclomethasone (0.01 to 100 nM). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were done with antibodies to human fibronectin; perlecan; elastin; the laminin beta(1), gamma(1), beta(2), alpha(1) chains; thrombospondin; chondroitin sulfate; collagen types I, III, IV, and V; versican; and decorin. Serum from the asthmatic individual, when compared with that from the nonasthmatic individual, caused a significant increase in the production of fibronectin, perlecan, laminin gamma(1), and chondroitin sulfate. Beclomethasone caused a significant reduction in the number of cells exposed to serum from either the asthmatic or nonasthmatic individual, but did not reverse the increase in ECM protein induced by the former. These results suggest an interaction between the ASM and the allergic process that may alter components of the airway wall in asthma, and that corticosteroids may not prevent the fibrosis induced by resident cells within the airways.<newchar><newabs>15829722<newchar>The biomechanical properties of connective tissues play fundamental roles in how mechanical interactions of the body with its environment produce physical forces at the cellular level. It is now recognized that mechanical interactions between cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) have major regulatory effects on cellular physiology and cell-cycle kinetics that can lead to the reorganization and remodeling of the ECM. The connective tissues are composed of cells and the ECM, which includes water and a variety of biological macromolecules. The macromolecules that are most important in determining the mechanical properties of these tissues are collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans. Among these macromolecules, the most abundant and perhaps most critical for structural integrity is collagen. In this review, we examine how mechanical forces affect the physiological functioning of the lung parenchyma, with special emphasis on the role of collagen. First, we overview the composition of the connective tissue of the lung and their complex structural organization. We then describe how mechanical properties of the parenchyma arise from its composition as well as from the architectural organization of the connective tissue. We argue that, because collagen is the most important load-bearing component of the parenchymal connective tissue, it is also critical in determining the homeostasis and cellular responses to injury. Finally, we overview the interactions between the parenchymal collagen network and cellular remodeling and speculate how mechanotransduction might contribute to disease propagation and the development of small- and large-scale heterogeneities with implications to impaired lung function in emphysema.<newchar><newabs>17715430<newchar>The adaptive growth of the uterus during pregnancy is a critical event that involves increased synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and dynamic remodeling of smooth muscle cell (SMC)-ECM interactions. We have previously found a dramatic increase in the expression of the mRNAs that encode fibronectin (FN) and its alpha5-integrin receptor (ITGA5) in pregnant rat myometrium near to term. Since the myometrium at term is exposed to considerable mechanical stretching of the uterine wall by the growing fetus(es), the objective of the present study was to examine its role in the regulation of FN and ITGA5 expression at late gestation and during labor. Using myometrial tissues from unilaterally pregnant rats, we investigated the temporal changes in Itga5 gene expression in gravid and empty uterine horns by Northern blotting and real-time PCR, in combination with immunoblotting and immunofluorescence analyses of the temporal/spatial distributions of the FN and ITGA5 proteins. In addition, we studied the effects of early progesterone (P4) withdrawal on Itga5 mRNA levels and ITGA5 protein detection. At all time-points examined, the Itga5 mRNA levels were increased in the gravid uterine horn, compared to the empty horn (P &lt; 0.05). Immunoblot analysis confirmed higher ITGA5 and FN protein levels in the myometrium, associated with gravidity (P &lt; 0.05). Immunodetection of ITGA5 was consistently high in the longitudinal muscle layer, increased with gestational age in the circular muscle layer of the gravid horn, and remained low in the empty horn. ITGA5 and FN immunostaining in the gravid horn exhibited a continuous layer of variable thickness associated directly with the surfaces of individual SMCs. In contrast to the effects of stretch, P4 does not appear to regulate ITGA5 expression. We speculate that the reinforcement of the FN-ITGA5 interaction: 1) contributes to myometrial hypertrophy and remodeling during late pregnancy; and 2) facilitates force transduction during the contractions of labor by anchoring hypertrophied SMCs to the uterine ECM.<newchar><newabs>20197081<newchar>Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver cancer and one of the most frequent types of cancer worldwide. It normally develops in patients with chronic liver disease, especially cirrhosis, although some cases without an apparent underlying liver disease have been reported. The pathogenesis of HCC is multi-factorial and complex. Hepatitis viruses are the main factors favoring the development of HCC. In fact, chronic inflammation associated with hepatitis C or B virus infection can lead to progressive liver fibrosis, cirrhosis and ultimately HCC. Chronic inflammation and liver fibrosis cause a continuous remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), a dynamic process that involves several molecules including integrins and matrix processing enzymes. An increasing body of evidence indicates that ADAMs are involved in promoting tumor formation and progression of HCC. A Disintegrin And Metalloproteases (ADAMs) are a group of proteins belonging to the zinc protease superfamily. ADAMs are usually transmembrane proteins that contain disintegrin and metalloprotease domains and are, therefore, able to carry out both cell adhesion and protease activities. Soluble isoforms of ADAMs have also been discovered and characterized. In this review, we focus on the contribution of ADAM proteins to HCC tumorigenesis and cancer progression. The potential role of ADAMs as key modulators of tumor-stroma interactions during tumor progression, by means of the activities of their constituent domains, is also discussed.<newchar><newabs>12181648<newchar>Connective tissue remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is an essential and dynamic process associated with both physiological responses, such as wound healing, and pathological conditions, such as renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis (TIF). Data from the published literature indicate that collagens and several non-collagenous ECM glycoproteins actively contribute to TIF. The early phase of TIF is usually associated with an inflammatory process mediated by soluble factors released by activated resident cells and by infiltrating cells. Fibrogenic cytokines and growth factors secreted by inflammatory cells and fibroblasts are actively involved in connective tissue remodeling, possibly by regulating the rate of synthesis and degradation of the ECM. An uncontrolled balance of this process usually results in TIF. We review the physiology of wound healing and the pathology of fibrosis, emphasizing TIF.<newchar><newabs>15893322<newchar>Myocardial scars from radiofrequency (RF) ablation can increase in size in the post-injury period, resulting in remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) contribute to adverse myocardial remodeling following injury. However, the role of specific MMP types in RF scar enlargement remains unclear. One MMP type, MMP-3, degrades a wide range of ECM substrates and can activate other MMPs. This project examined LV remodeling in wild type (WT) and MMP-3 deficient (mmp-3-/-) mice following RF injury. RF lesions (0.5 mm probe, 80 degrees C, 30 s) were created on the LV epicardium of WT (C57/BL6) and mmp-3-/- mice and were terminally studied at 1 h, 3, 7, and 28 days post-RF (n=10 each). Heart mass indexed to tibial length (mg/mm) was similar in the WT and mmp-3-/- mice at 1 h (8.1+/-0.3 vs. 7.6+/-0.3), but lower in the mmp-3-/- mice at 28 days post-RF (11.9+/-0.4 vs. 10.5+/-0.4, P&lt;0.05). Scar volumes were greater in the mmp-3-/- mice at 3 days, but similar in the two groups at 28 days. Immunohistochemical localization showed fewer macrophages and lymphocytes at the scar border at 3 days in the mmp-3-/- hearts, but similar staining for these cells in WT and mmp-3-/- hearts at 7 and 28 days post-RF. Post-RF, the early increase in scar volume was accelerated in mmp-3-/- mice and associated with abnormal inflammatory cell infiltration/migration to the area of injury. These findings define a mechanistic role for MMP-3 in RF scar expansion and provide a temporal window during which interruption of MMP-3 activation may impair post-RF myocardial wound healing.<newchar><newabs>19181000<newchar>Skeletal muscle regeneration is a highly synchronized process involving the activation of various cellular and molecular events, coordinating inflammation and regeneration processes which are crucial for the beneficial outcome of tissue remodeling. Fibrosis, a failure of tissue remodeling, is initiated with muscle regeneration; however, it is the result of an excessive inflammatory response, representing an imbalance between enhanced production and deposition and impaired degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components of the muscle. Therefore, factors influencing the relative degree of muscle fiber regeneration as compared to the amount of scar formation have a critical role in functional muscle remodeling. Herein we have focused on the role of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF/1) in ECM degradation and reconstitution in muscles.<newchar><newabs>12520545<newchar>Tissue repair and regeneration are the normal biological responses of many different tissues in the body to injury. During the healing process, profound changes occur in cell composition and extracellular matrix (ECM) formation. Fibroblasts and equivalent reparative cells migrate to the wounded area and subsequently proliferate. These cells and reparative cells from the surrounding tissue are responsible for the rapid repair which results in tissue regeneration. Growth factors, one of which is transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), stimulate fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells to proliferate and synthesize ECM proteins. This process of early repair provides a rapid way to restore new tissue and mechanical integrity. This early tissue repair process is normally followed by involution, which requires the production and activation of proteases, tissue maturation and remodeling, reorganization and finally regeneration. Alternately, failure to replace the critical components of the ECM, including elastin and basement membrane, results in abnormal regeneration of the epithelial cell layer. Although remodeling should occur during healing, provisional repair may be followed by excessive synthesis and deposition of collagen, which results in irreversible fibrosis and scarring. This excessive fibrosis which occurs in aberrant healing is at least in part mediated by persistent TGF-beta. Because of the central role of collagen in the wound healing process, the pharmacological control of collagen synthesis has been of paramount importance as a possible way to abrogate aberrant healing and prevent irreversible fibrosis. Fibrosis is an abnormal response to tissue injury.<newchar><newabs>19646751<newchar>Gold nanorods (AuNRs) have unique optical properties for numerous biomedical applications, but the interactions between AuNRs and proteins, particularly those of the extracellular matrix (ECM), are poorly understood. Here the effects of AuNRs on the self-assembly, mechanics, and remodeling of type I collagen gels were examined in vitro. AuNRs were modified with polyelectrolyte multilayers (PEMs) to minimize cytotoxicity, and AuNRs with different terminal polymer chemistries were examined for their interactions with collagen by turbidity assays, rheological tests, and microscopy. Gel contraction assays were used to examine the effects of the PEM-coated AuNRs on cell-mediated collagen remodeling. Polyanion-terminated AuNRs significantly reduced the lag (nucleation) phase of collagen self-assembly and significantly increased the dynamic shear modulus of the polymerized gels, whereas polycation-terminated AuNRs had no effect on the mechanical properties of the collagen. Both polyanion- and polycation-terminated AuNRs significantly inhibited collagen gel contraction by cardiac fibroblasts, and the nanoparticles were localized in intra-, peri-, and extracellular compartments, suggesting that PEM-coated AuNRs influence cell behavior via multiple mechanisms. These results demonstrate the significance of nanoparticle-ECM interactions in determining the bioactivity of nanoparticles.<newchar><newabs>11991086<newchar>Pulmonary fibrosis has an aggressive course and is usually fatal an average of 3 to 6 years after the onset of symptoms. Pulmonary fibrosis is associated with deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components in the lung interstitium. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a major group of proteinases known to regulate the ECM remodeling and so they are hypothesized to be important in the process of lung fibrosis. These led to the concept that modulation of airway remodeling including excessive proteolytic damage of the tissue may be of interest for future treatment. The excessive airway remodeling as a result of an imbalance in the equilibrium of the normal processes of synthesis and degradation of extracellular matrix components could argue in favor of antiprotease treatments. Moreover, these observations emphasize that effective therapies for these disorders must be given early in the natural history of the disease, prior to the development of expensive lung destruction and fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>18938117<newchar>Biological scaffold materials derived from the extracellular matrix (ECM) of intact mammalian tissues have been successfully used in a variety of tissue engineering/regenerative medicine applications both in preclinical studies and in clinical applications. Although it is recognized that the materials have constructive remodeling properties, the mechanisms by which functional tissue restoration is achieved are not well understood. There is evidence to support essential roles for both the structural and functional characteristics of the biological scaffold materials. This paper provides an overview of the composition and structure of selected ECM scaffold materials, the effects of manufacturing methods upon the structural properties and resulting mechanical behavior of the scaffold materials, and the in vivo degradation and remodeling of ECM scaffolds with an emphasis on tissue function.<newchar><newabs>12611045<newchar>Cardiac remodelling associated with primitive and secondary cardiomyopathy is generally associated with changes in the expression in extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins as well as their transmembrane receptors, the integrins. It emerges now that the ECM provides a structural, chemical, and mechanical substrate that is essential in cardiac function and responses to pathophysiological signals. This review will describe the various elements of the ECM, its modifications that are associated with cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure, and the molecular basis bringing a better insight into the dynamics of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>10503958<newchar>Altered degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) underlies vascular remodeling, a hallmark in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases including hypertension and aneurysmal dilatation. Although alcohol is recognized as a risk factor for certain cardiovascular disease states, its role in vascular remodeling has not been completely explored. We studied the effect of chronic alcohol consumption on upregulation of the enzymatic activity of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) as a possible pathway for large vessel remodeling. For this purpose, female rats were placed on one of three diets: a modified Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet containing 35% ethanol-derived calories, a pair-fed liquid diet with ethanol replaced by isocaloric maltose-dextrin, or a standard rat pellet. Weekly blood alcohol concentration averaged 117+/-7.9 mg/dl for the alcohol-fed rats. At 2, 4, and 72 weeks, aortas were removed and processed for measuring MMPs activity by gelatin zymography. Aortic extracts from rats on long-term (72 weeks), but not the short-term (2 and 4 weeks), alcohol diets showed increased MMP-2 activity. Furthermore, histochemical analysis of the aortas showed distinct disruption of the elastic fibers only in the 72 weeks alcohol-fed rats, compared to the control animals. These observations demonstrate that long-term alcohol consumption up-regulates MMP-2 activity, which is coincident with the alteration of aortic ECM composition through the degradation of vascular elastin components.<newchar><newabs>18782572<newchar>Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) is a common procedure for treating atherosclerosis, but its efficacy is limited because of the occurrence of restenosis within 3-6 months after angioplasty. Restenosis is induced by the remodeling of the vessel wall and/or the accumulation of cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) in the intimal layer. Therefore, the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) system may be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of restenosis or atherosclerosis. Cordycepin is reported to possess many pharmacological activities including immunological stimulating, anti-cancer, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory activities. The effect of cordycepin on restenosis has not yet been clearly elucidated. Therefore, in the present study, we tested the role of cordycepin on the MMP system in vascular smooth muscle cells. In the carotid artery of a balloon-injured Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat, neointimal formation was reduced by treatment with cordycepin (20 microM/day, i.p), which inhibited the proliferation of rat aortic smooth muscle cells (RaoSMCs). To investigate the mechanism by which cordycepin inhibits the remodeling of the vessel wall and/or the accumulation of cells and ECM, we examined the activation of MMP systems in collagen type I-activated RaoSMCs. Cordycepin markedly inhibited the activation of MMP-2 and -9 as well as the expression of extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) in a dose-dependent manner in collagen type I-activated RaoSMCs. Moreover, cordycepin suppressed cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression related to hyperplasia of RAoSMCs. Taken together, these data suggest that cordycepin may induce antiproliferation in RAoSMCs via the modulation of vessel wall remodeling. Therefore, cordycepin may be a potential therapeutic approach to treat restenosis.<newchar><newabs>20238476<newchar>During amphibian metamorphosis, the larval tissues/organs rapidly degenerate to adapt from the aquatic to the terrestrial life. At the cellular level, a large quantity of apoptosis occurs in a spatiotemporally-regulated fashion in different organs to ensure timely removal of larval organs/tissues and the development of adult ones for the survival of the individuals. Thus, amphibian metamorphosis provides us a good opportunity to understand the mechanisms regulating apoptosis. To investigate this process at the molecular level, a number of thyroid hormone (TH) response genes have been isolated from several organs of Xenopus laevis tadpoles and their expression and functional analyses are now in progress using modern molecular and genetic technologies. In this review, we will first summarize when and where apoptosis occurs in typical larva-specific and larval-to-adult remodeling amphibian organs to highlight that the timing of apoptosis is different in different tissues/organs, even though all are induced by the same circulating TH. Next, to discuss how TH spatiotemporally regulates the apoptosis, we will focus on apoptosis of the X. laevis small intestine, one of the best characterized remodeling organs. Functional studies of TH response genes using transgenic frogs and culture techniques have shown that apoptosis of larval epithelial cells can be induced by TH either cell-autonomously or indirectly through interactions with extracellular matrix (ECM) components of the underlying basal lamina. Here, we propose that multiple intra- and extracellular apoptotic pathways are coordinately controlled by TH to ensure massive but well-organized apoptosis, which is essential for the proper progression of amphibian metamorphosis.<newchar><newabs>17720239<newchar>The nanometer-scale mesh size of many synthetic crosslinked hydrogel networks restricts encapsulated cells to a rounded morphology that can inhibit cellular processes such as proliferation and migration that are essential for the early stages of remodeling and tissue formation. The objective of these studies was to investigate an approach for accelerating cellular remodeling based on the creation of semi-interpenetrating networks (IPNs) composed of hydrolytically degradable poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) diacrylate macromers and native, enzymatically degradable extracellular matrix (ECM) components (collagen, gelatin and hyaluronic acid (HA)). Among the three ECM components investigated, addition of HA at concentrations of 0.12% w/v and greater supported fibroblast spreading throughout the three-dimensional network and significantly increased proliferation relative to control hydrogels without HA. Incorporation of HA resulted in relatively small changes in hydrogel physical/chemical properties such as swelling, degradation rate, and elastic modulus. Fibroblast spreading was eliminated by the addition of hyaluronidase inhibitors, demonstrating that cell-mediated enzymatic degradation of HA is a necessary mechanism responsible for the observed increases in fibroblast activity. By accelerating early cellular remodeling and growth, these semi-IPNs may be useful vehicles for cell transplantation in a variety of tissue engineering applications.<newchar><newabs>16280048<newchar>In the rodent, epithelial end buds define the tips of elongating mammary ducts. These highly motile structures undergo repeated dichotomous branching as they aggressively advance through fatty stroma and, turning to avoid other ducts, they finally cease growth leaving behind the open, tree-like framework on which secretory alveoli develop during pregnancy. This review identifies the motility of end buds as a unique developmental marker that represents the successful integration of systemic and local mammotrophic influences, and covers relevant advances in ductal growth regulation, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, and cell adhesion in the inner end bud. An unexpected growth-promoting synergy between insulin-like growth factor-1 and progesterone, in which ducts elongate without forming new end buds, is described as well as evidence strongly supporting self-inhibition of ductal elongation by end-bud-secreted transforming growth factor-beta acting on stromal targets. The influence of the matrix metalloproteinase ECM-remodeling enzymes, notably matrix metalloproteinase-2, on end bud growth is discussed in the broader context of enzymes that regulate the polysaccharide-rich glycosaminoglycan elements of the ECM. Finally, a critical, motility-enabling role for the cellular architecture of the end bud is identified and the contribution of cadherins, the netrin/neogenin system, and ErbB2 to the structure and motility of end buds is discussed.<newchar><newabs>10698965<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of Zn(2+)-dependent extracellular proteases capable of degrading various proteinaceous components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). They are expressed in developmental and pathological processes such as postlactation mammary gland involution and tumor metastasis. Relatively few studies have been carried out to investigate the function of MMPs during embryogenesis and postembryonic organ development. Using Xenopus development as a model system, we and others have previously isolated three MMP genes as thyroid hormone response genes. They have distinct temporal and organ-specific regulations during thyroid hormone-dependent metamorphosis. We demonstrate here that three MMPs-stromelysin-3 (ST3), collagenases-3 (Col3), and collagenases-4 (Col4)-also have distinct spatial and temporal expression profiles during embryogenesis. Consistent with earlier suggestions that ST3 is a direct thyroid hormone response gene whereas Col3 and Col4 are not, we show that precocious overexpression of thyroid hormone receptors in the presence of thyroid hormone lead to increased expression of ST3, but not Col3. Furthermore, our whole-mount in situ hybridizations reveal a tight but distinct association of individual MMPs with tissue remodeling in different regions of the animal during embryogenesis. These results suggest that ST3 is likely to play a role in ECM remodeling that facilitate apoptotic tissue remodeling or resorption, whereas Col3 and Col4 appear to participate in connective tissue degradation during development.<newchar><newabs>16112664<newchar>Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during development, angiogenesis, wound healing, tumor metastasis, and other morphogenetic processes depends on the exquisitely regulated activities of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Yet very little is known about the activity patterns of these proteases in vivo. We have employed fluorescent MMP-substrates, both in vitro and in vivo, to characterize patterns of MMP activity in the zebrafish embryo. Qualitatively similar patterns of degradation are detected using native Type I or Type IV collagen substrates, suggesting that multiple MMPs are being regulated concomitantly. MMP activity is observed primarily in ECM-rich structures predicted to be undergoing active remodeling, such as the perichordal sheath and somite boundaries. Patterns of Type I and Type IV collagen hydrolysis are similar, but not identical in embryos of any given stage. Conventional gelatin zymography shows MMPs present in embryos as early as 3-somites (11 h) and our in vivo assays detect Type IV collagen degradation at somite boundaries as early as 4-somites (11.5 h). However, we are unable to detect significant in vitro activity using homogenates made from embryos prior to Prim-16 (31 h). Mixed lysate assays demonstrate that this is the result of endogenous inhibitors present in early embryos, suggesting a model of matrix remodeling regulated by spatially heterogeneous MMP inhibition.<newchar><newabs>19541627<newchar>Physical forces generated by cells drive morphologic changes during development and can feedback to regulate cellular phenotypes. Because these phenomena typically occur within a 3-dimensional (3D) matrix in vivo, we used microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology to generate arrays of microtissues consisting of cells encapsulated within 3D micropatterned matrices. Microcantilevers were used to simultaneously constrain the remodeling of a collagen gel and to report forces generated during this process. By concurrently measuring forces and observing matrix remodeling at cellular length scales, we report an initial correlation and later decoupling between cellular contractile forces and changes in tissue morphology. Independently varying the mechanical stiffness of the cantilevers and collagen matrix revealed that cellular forces increased with boundary or matrix rigidity whereas levels of cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins correlated with levels of mechanical stress. By mapping these relationships between cellular and matrix mechanics, cellular forces, and protein expression onto a bio-chemo-mechanical model of microtissue contractility, we demonstrate how intratissue gradients of mechanical stress can emerge from collective cellular contractility and finally, how such gradients can be used to engineer protein composition and organization within a 3D tissue. Together, these findings highlight a complex and dynamic relationship between cellular forces, ECM remodeling, and cellular phenotype and describe a system to study and apply this relationship within engineered 3D microtissues.<newchar><newabs>16202218<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and plays an important role in cardiac remodeling. Previous studies from our lab demonstrated an increase in gelatinolytic-MMP-2 and -9 activities in endocardial tissue from ischemic cardiomyopathic (ICM) and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathic (DCM) hearts. The signaling mechanism responsible for the left ventricular (LV) remodeling, however, is unclear. Administration of cardiac specific inhibitor of metalloproteinase (CIMP) prevented the activation of MMP-2 and -9 in ailing to failing myocardium. Activation of MMP-2 and -9 leads to induction of proteinase activated receptor-1 (PAR-1). We hypothesize that the early induction of MMP-9 is a key regulator for modulating intracellular signaling through activation of PAR and various downstream events which are implicated in development of cardiac fibrosis in an extracellular receptor mediated kinase-1 (ERK-1) and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) dependent manner. To test this hypothesis, explanted human heart tissues from ICM and DCM patients were obtained at the time of orthotopic cardiac transplants. Quantitative analysis of MMP-2 and -9 gelatinolytic activities was made by real-time quantitative zymography. Gel phosphorylation staining for PAR-1 showed a significant increase in ICM hearts. Western blot and RT-PCR analysis and in-situ labeling, showed significant increased expression of PAR-1, ERK-1and FAK in ICM and DCM. These observations suggest that the enhanced expression and potentially increased activity of LV myocardial MMP-9 triggers the signal cascade instigating cardiac remodeling. This early mechanism for the initiation of LV remodeling appears to have a role in end-stage human heart failure.<newchar><newabs>17171642<newchar>The success of vascular intervention including angioplasty, stenting, and arterial bypass remains limited by negative remodeling resulted in lumen restenosis. This study was to characterize the global transcription profile reflecting concurrent events along arterial remodeling and neointima formation in a rat carotid artery balloon-injury model. Expression profiling of injured and control common carotid arteries on days 4, 7, 14 post-injury that mark the major pathohistological progression stages of neointimal formation were recorded on high-density oligonucleotide arrays. A subset of genes from microarray-based data was further studied using quantitative real time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization with sequential arterial samples from days 1 to 28 post-injury. The gene-encoded proteins were validated with Western blot. Besides temporal induction of a large cluster of genes over-represented by cell proliferation and macromolecule metabolism gene ontology categories, a fast-evolving inflammation could be demonstrated by the induction of Tgfb and other anti-inflammatory genes (e.g., C1qtnf3 (C1q and tumor necrosis factor related protein 3 (predicted))) and a shift from type 1 to 2 helper T cell response. The most significant signature of the induced neointimal profile is enrichment of genes functionally related to angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling (e.g., Spp1 (secreted phosphoprotein 1), CD44 (CD44 antigen), and Cxcl12 (chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (stromal cell-derived factor 1)). Some of the genes represent stress-responsive mesenchymal stromal cell cytokines. This study highlighted mesenchymal stromal cell cytokines-driven inflammatory extracellular matrix remodeling, as target processes for potential clinical therapeutic intervention.<newchar><newabs>12902635<newchar>Cells within the vascular wall connect their cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix (ECM) through a family of cell surface receptors known as integrins. The ability of integrins to act as a link between the extracellular and intracellular environments allows transmission of inside-out and outside-in signals capable of modulating diverse vascular phenomena. In this review we summarize what is currently known about the involvement of integrins in the control of vascular tone, permeability and remodeling. We discuss the capacity of integrins to act as detectors of injury-generated molecules derived from ECM proteins, as well as the putative role of integrins as mechanosensors for shear and tension. Particular attention is given to the mechanisms responsible for linking integrins to the control of vascular tone, and we review the intracellular signaling pathways involved in effecting the vascular responses elicited by integrin activation. Finally, the involvement of integrins in vascular remodeling and vascular disease is analyzed. Considerable evidence strongly indicates that integrins are involved in both acute and chronic vascular control. Understanding the elements and the sequence of events linking integrins with vasoregulation is important for deciphering phenomena such as the pressure-dependent myogenic response, flow-dependent changes in vascular diameter, and vascular remodeling as they occur in physiological and pathological conditions. Further understanding of the role of integrins in vascular control holds promise as new avenues for prophylactic and therapeutic manipulation of vascular phenomena.<newchar><newabs>12477149<newchar>The incidence of diabetic amputations is 2- to 3-fold higher in African-American patients compared to Caucasians. Vascular remodeling characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition occurs in diabetes and contributes to vascular complications. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) play important roles in the regulation of collagen turnover and vascular remodeling. However, the temporal expression profile of MMPs in diabetic vascular tissue during the disease process remained unknown. The objective of this study was to compare the vascular MMP system in African-American diabetic patients without symptoms to patients undergoing lower limb amputation due to severe vascular complications. Internal mammary artery (IMA, N = 8) and anterior/posterior tibial artery (AT/PT, N = 8) specimens were obtained from patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting and lower limb amputation, respectively. ECM inducer protein (EMMPRIN) and MMP activator membrane-type MMP (MT1-MMP), as well as MMP-1, -2, and -9, were quantified by immunoblotting and densitometry (pixels). MMP-1 and -9 levels were decreased from 398 +/- 61 and 175 +/- 54 pixels, respectively, in IMA tissue to 287 +/- 31 and 51 +/- 36 pixels in the AT/PT tissue (P &lt; .05). Both EMMPRIN and MT1-MMP expression was increased by 3-fold in AT/PT preparations (P &lt; .05). These results provided evidence that the molecular components required for the induction and activation of the MMP system exist in arterial vasculature and, MMP expression is downregulated in diabetic patients with severe complications despite elevated MMP inducer and activator proteins. Decreased MMP activity may contribute to pathological remodeling leading to increased incidence of amputations in African-American patients.<newchar><newabs>17453912<newchar>Decidualization in mice comprises a deep remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) components of the endometrium. In a previous biochemical study we showed that collagen types I and III are present in both pregnant and nonpregnant mouse endometrium, whereas collagen type V is expressed exclusively after the onset of decidualization. The distribution of collagen types in the pregnant mouse endometrium and possible changes of these molecular types in the different regions of the decidua is, however, not known. Using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy we showed the presence of collagen types I, III, and V in the endometrial stroma of implantation and interimplantation sites from days 5 to 8 of pregnancy in the mouse. Collagen type III was chiefly expressed in the implantation sites and was the only collagen type to be present in the materno-fetal interface on the day of the embryo implantation. However, collagen type I was the predominant collagen in the interimplantation sites. Collagen type V was weakly expressed in the nondecidualized stroma during all periods but was expressed in larger amounts in the decidualized areas on day 7 of pregnancy, simultaneously with the accumulation of thick collagen fibrils in the same region. The highest immunofluorescence labeling for the three types of collagen was observed on day 7 when the antimesometrial decidual tissue achieved its greatest development. These data support previous studies that showed an intense ECM remodeling of the mouse endometrial stroma during the beginning of pregnancy. This outstanding remodeling may be important to stabilize placental anchorage.<newchar><newabs>20626027<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the arterial wall during atherogenesis. Collagens are the most abundant proteins in the ECM. MMP-8 is expressed by cells associated with the development of the atherosclerotic plaque. It cleaves collagen type I three times more potently than two other interstitial collagenases MMP-1 and MMP-13. The aim of this study was to investigate whether plasma MMP-8 values are associated with occurrence of carotid plaque (CP) and possible correlations with clinical and biochemical parameters in carotid atherosclerosis (CA) patients. Total plasma MMP-8 levels were quantified by ELISA in 63 patients with ultrasonographic evidence of CP presence and 12 controls. Plasma MMP-8 values were significantly higher in patients with CA compared with controls (median 23.36 ng/ml vs. 13.02 ng/ml, P&lt;0.001) but they did not differ significantly according to gender, smoking and hypertensive status, associated diseases, and use of statins. Statistically significant positive correlations were observed between MMP-8 plasma values and C reactive protein (r=0.41, P=0.001), urea (r=0.50, P&lt;0.001), aspartate transaminase (r=0.48, P=0.001), and creatinine levels (r=0.38, P=0.006). These results suggest association of MMP-8 plasma levels with occurrence of CP and correlation with certain biochemical markers.<newchar><newabs>16043882<newchar>Hearts of normotensive angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2)-deficient mice do not develop fibrosis after angiotensin II-induced chronic hypertension. Thus, the goal of our study was to clarify whether AT2 knockouts (KOs) are also characterized by altered left ventricular (LV) function and modified remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) after induction of myocardial infarction (MI). MI was induced in 5-mo-old female AT2-deficient mice and controls by occlusion of the left coronary artery. Time-matched sham-operated animals served as controls. After 48 h, the first sets of mice were hemodynamically characterized using a pressure-tip catheter (n = 8/group). We also obtained pressure volume loops using a microconductance catheter in additional sets of animals 3 wk after induction of MI (n = 7/group). Finally, the collagen index was illustrated by Sirius red staining and quantified by digital analysis. Whereas the LV function of sham-operated animals did not differ between both genotypes, the collagen index was 44% lower in KO animals. Forty-eight hours and 3 wk post-MI, systolic and diastolic LV function were impaired in both AT2-deficient and wild-type (WT) animals to the same extent by approx 45%. No differences were found between the two genotypes with respect to LV hypertrophy and the fibrosis index in the infarcted and noninfarcted areas 3 wk post-MI. While AT2-KO mice had less cardiac collagen content under basal conditions, the receptor deficiency had no significant influence on LV function at the two investigated time points after induction of MI or on the remodeling of ECM at the latter time point. Thus, hypertension-induced fibrosis is probably triggered by other control mechanisms than fibrosis induced by MI.<newchar><newabs>20617423<newchar>The role of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in various pathological processes, including angiogenesis, thrombosis, inflammation, apoptosis, cell migration, and proliferation is well documented. These processes can lead to both acute and chronic disease states such as ocular diseases, metastasis, unstable angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, osteoporosis, a wide range of inflammatory diseases, vascular remodeling, and neurodegenerative disorders. A key success in this field was identification of the role of platelet glycoprotein (GP)IIb/IIIa in the prevention and diagnosis of various thromboembolic disorders. The use of soluble adhesion molecules as potential diagnostic markers for acute and chronic leukocyte, platelet, and endothelial cell insult is becoming increasingly common. The development of various therapeutic and diagnostic candidates based on the key role of CAMs, with special emphasis on integrins in various diseases, as well as the structure-function aspects of cell adhesion and signaling of the different CAMs and ECM are highlighted.<newchar><newabs>14729359<newchar>Scleral fibroblasts are involved in scleral remodeling during axial elongation in myopia. Mechanical load is a potent stimulator of gene expression. This study seeks to identify changes in gene expression of scleral fibroblasts in response to mechanical load and speculate on possible mechanisms of scleral remodeling in the development of myopia. Human scleral fibroblasts (HSFs) were mechanically stretched for 30 min and 24 hr. A gene microarray analysis was used to measure changes in gene expression. A total of 237 genes revealed differential and significant changes in expression (P&lt;0.01) after 30 min of stretching. Of these, 28 unexpressed genes began to be expressed (turned on), while 31 expressed genes were no longer expressed (turned off). After 24 hr, 308 genes showed reproducible changes in expression (P&lt;0.01), while 29 genes were turned on and 17 genes were turned off. After 30 min, 25 genes showed at least a threefold change in expression. These included genes for cell receptors, protein kinases, cell growth/differentiation factors, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, lipid metabolism, protein metabolism, transcription factors, binding proteins and water channels. After 24 hr, 21 genes showed at least a threefold change in expression. These included genes for cell receptors, protein kinases, cell growth/differentiation factors, lipid metabolism, ECM proteins, transcription factors, and carbohydrate metabolism. RT-PCR and Southern blotting confirmed the changes in expression of selected genes. In this study we identified a large number of early and late mechanical response genes in HSFs. These changes in gene expression will provide potential candidate genes that might be involved in scleral remodeling during axial elongation in myopia.<newchar><newabs>20549941<newchar>A role for integrins in mechanotransduction has been suggested because these molecules form an important mechanical link between the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the cytoskeleton. An example of mechanotransduction in blood vessels is the myogenic response--the rapid and maintained constriction of arterioles in response to pressure elevation. L-type calcium channels and large-conductance, calcium-activated potassium (BK) channels are known to play important roles in the myogenic response and in the maintenance of myogenic (pressure-induced) vascular tone. Our recent studies on isolated, cannulated arterioles and freshly-dispersed arteriolar smooth muscle cells show that both L-type calcium channels (Ca(v)1.2) and BK channels are regulated by alpha5beta1 integrin activation. Alpha5beta1 integrin interacts with the ECM protein fibronectin, which is distributed in basement membrane and interstitial matrices surrounding smooth muscle cells within the arteriolar wall. Truncation and site-directed mutagenesis strategies reveal that regulation of Ca(v)1.2 by alpha5beta1 integrin requires phosphorylation of the channel alpha1C subunit at C-terminal residues Ser-1901 and Tyr-2122. Likewise, BK channel potentiation by alpha5beta1 integrin activation requires c-Src phosphorylation of the channel alpha-subunit at residue Tyr-766. Thus, both L-type calcium channels and BK channels can be regulated coordinately through integrin-linked phosphorylation cascades involving c-Src. We propose that these two channels are under constitutive control by alpha5beta1 integrin-fibronectin interactions in the vessel wall such that the balance of their activity determines myogenic tone and the vascular response to vessel wall injury/remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16675849<newchar>Ventricular myocyte hypertrophy is an important compensatory growth response to pressure overload. However, pathophysiological cardiac hypertrophy is accompanied by reactive fibrosis and remodeling. The Rho kinase family, consisting of ROCK1 and ROCK2, has been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy and ventricular remodeling. However, these previous studies relied heavily on pharmacological inhibitors,and not on gene deletion. Here we used ROCK1knockout (ROCK1-/-) mice to investigate role of ROCK1 in the development of ventricular remodeling induced by transverse aortic banding. We observed that ROCK1 deletion did not impair compensatory hypertrophic response induced by pressure overload. However, ROCK1-/- mice exhibited reduced perivascular and interstitial fibrosis, which was observed at 3 wk but not at 1 wk after the banding. The reduced fibrosis in the myocardium of ROCK1-/- mice was closely associated with reduced expression of a variety of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and fibrogenic cytokines such as TGFbeta2 and connective tissue growth factor. This inhibitory effect of ROCK1 deletion on pathophysiological induction of fibrogenic cytokines was further confirmed in the myocardium of transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression of Gq. Thus, these results indicate that ROCK1 contributes to the development of cardiac fibrosis and induction of fibrogenic cytokines in cardiomyocytes in response to pathological stimuli.<newchar><newabs>20603225<newchar>Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that is characterized primarily by progressive breakdown of articular cartilage. The loss of proteoglycans, the mineralization of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the hypertrophic differentiation of the chondrocytes constitute hallmarks of the disease. The pathogenesis of OA includes several pathways, which in single are very well investigated and partly understood, but in their complex interplay remain mainly unclear. This review summarises recent data on the underlying mechanisms, specifically with respect to cell-matrix interactions and cartilage mineralization. It points out why these findings are of importance for future OA research and for the development of novel therapeutic strategies to treat OA.<newchar><newabs>15823273<newchar>From experimental and clinical studies it is known that matrix conservation and degradation by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) plays a major role in plaque progression and destabilization with related onset of acute vascular events such as acute coronary syndromes or cerebrovascular accidents. Recently, extracellular MMPs inducer (EMMPRIN) has been reported to induce and activate the expression of MMPs in myocardium and plays an important role in the ventricular remodeling in human heart failure. Similarly to heart failure myocardium, EMMPRIN may be expressed in human atheroma and play a role in the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and atherogenic cell differentiation. This study was designed to investigate the possible biological role of EMMPRIN in human atheroma. Immunohistochemical analysis for MMPs and EMMPRIN was performed on human carotid endarterectomy specimens and control aortas. EMMPRIN showed significant immunoreactivity in human atherosclerotic carotid lesions, and was colocalized with macrophage/monocyte infiltrates in atherosclerotic intima, plaque itself and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Zymography and Western blot analysis revealed EMMPRIN expression in the carotid atheromas, but not in the control aortas. Human bone marrow monocytes, which were cultured with atherogenic proinflammatory cytokine stimulation revealed increased EMMPRIN and MMPs expressions. ECM remodeling is under the control of induction and inhibition of matrix degrading protease and the novel MMP inducer, EMMPRIN may play a role in influx and differentiation of monocytes and destabilizing atheroma.<newchar><newabs>20233948<newchar>Natural and synthetic biomaterials utilized in tissue engineering applications require a dynamic interplay of complex macromolecular compositions of hydrated extracellular matrices (ECMs) and soluble growth factors. The challenges in utilizing synthetic ECMs is the effective control of temporal and spatial complexity of multiple signal presentation, as compared to natural ECMs that possess the inherent properties of biological recognition, including presentation of receptor-binding ligands, susceptibility to cell-triggered proteolytic degradation, and remodeling. We have developed a murine preadipocyte differentiation system for generating a natural basement membrane extract (Adipogel) comprising ECM proteins (collagen IV, laminin, hyaluronan, and fibronectin) and including relevant growth factors (hepatocyte growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and leukemia inhibitory factor). We have shown the effective utilization of the growth factor-enriched extracellular matrix for enhanced albumin synthesis rate of primary hepatocyte cultures for a period of 10 d as compared to collagen sandwich cultures and comparable or higher function as compared to Matrigel cultures. We have also demonstrated comparable cytochrome P450 1A1 activity for the collagen-Adipogel condition to the collagen double-gel and Matrigel culture conditions. A metabolic analysis revealed that utilization of Adipogel in primary hepatocyte cultures increased serine, glycine, threonine, alanine, tyrosine, valine, methionine, lysine, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, taurine, cysteine, and glucose uptake rates to enhance hepatocyte protein synthesis as compared to collagen double-gel cultures. The demonstrated synthesis, isolation, characterization, and application of Adipogel provide immense potential for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications.<newchar><newabs>19639678<newchar>Gender influence on left ventricular (LV) remodeling associated to aortic valve stenosis (AS) has been long recognized, but underlying myocardial gene expression patterns have not been explored. We studied whether sex differences in echocardiographic LV anatomy and function in AS patients are associated with specific changes in myocardial mRNA expression of remodeling proteins. AS (n=39) and control (n=23)patients were assessed echocardiographically, and LV myocardial mRNA levels were quantified by PCR. AS patients exhibit increased wall thicknesses and LV mass index (LVMI), but only men show chamber dilation.Collagens and fibronectin mRNA levels increased correlatively to transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1). In AS women, collagen I upregulation was proportionally higher than other extracellular matrix (ECM)components. No changes in matrix metalloproteinase-2 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 were detected. Gene expressions of sarcomeric proteins (beta-myosin heavy chain and myosin light chain-2) and TGF-beta1 were directly correlated with each other. Myosin light chain-2 mRNA levels increased proportionally to the transvalvular gradient, but women did so in a greater extent than men for a given gradient. In women, the hypertrophic growth response, reflected by LVMI, was proportional to the expression of genes encoding sarcomeric proteins and TGF-beta1. In men, chamber dilation and deterioration of LVEF was proportional to collagens, fibronectin, and TGF-beta1 gene expression levels. We evidenced gender biased gene expression patterns of the intracellular TGF-beta pathways involving the Smad branch, but not the TAK-1 branch, that could contribute to the remodeling differences observed in AS men and women. Based on these findings, a gender specific therapeutic approach of pressure overload LV hypertrophy could be justified.<newchar><newabs>19951249<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) belong to a family of closely related calcium- and zinc-dependent endopeptidases involved in the degradation and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that are associated with the tumorigenic processes. MMPs promote tumor invasion and metastasis, regulating host defense mechanisms and normal cell function. Thus, MMP inhibitors (MMPIs) are expected to be useful chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of malignant cancer, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis. A vast number of small molecular MMPIs have been developed in recent years. Although there have been considerable preclinical and clinical studies on these inhibitors, most of the effective candidates in clinical trials, however, have yielded unsatisfactory results, thus they are as yet unavailable for use as therapeutic drugs. Currently, more efforts have been directed to the design of specific inhibitors towards certain MMP family members for selective usage. This review will focus primarily on an analysis of recent developed MMPIs that have entered preclinical or clinical trials, and recently registered patents with regard to new highly selective MMPIs in USA or patent applications related to the specific inhibitors of MMPs. We also analyze the clinical failure and discuss the possible strategies to best optimize the development of these novel agents.<newchar><newabs>20940256<newchar>In tissue repair, fibroblasts migrate into the wound to produce and remodel extracellular matrix (ECM). Integrins are believed to be crucial for tissue repair, but their tissue-specific role in this process is poorly understood. Here, we show that mice containing a fibroblast-specific deletion of integrin β1 exhibit delayed cutaneous wound closure and less granulation tissue formation, including reduced production of new ECM and reduced expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA). Integrin-β1-deficient fibroblasts showed reduced expression of type I collagen and connective tissue growth factor, and failed to differentiate into myofibroblasts as a result of reduced α-SMA stress fiber formation. Loss of integrin β1 in adult fibroblasts reduced their ability to adhere to, to spread on and to contract ECM. Within stressed collagen matrices, integrin-β1-deficient fibroblasts showed reduced activation of latent TGFβ. Addition of active TGFβ alleviated the phenotype of integrin-β1-deficient mice. Thus integrin β1 is essential for normal wound healing, where it acts, at least in part, through a TGFβ-dependent mechanism in vivo.<newchar><newabs>20096316<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are endopeptidases responsible for degrading the extracellular matrix (ECM) and remodeling tissue in both physiological and pathological processes. MMP2 and membrane-type 1 MMP (MT1-MMP) have been associated with tumor invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis; therefore, a molecular imaging strategy assessing their activity may help to predict the malignancy of tumors. Here, we established a novel method of specifically tagging the surface of MMP2- and MT1-MMP-positive cells, and applied it to the development of an optical imaging probe. We constructed a protein-based probe composed of a glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-tag (Inhibitory [I]-domain), a polypeptide as a specific substrate for both MMP2 and MT1-MMP (Cleaved [C]-domain), a transmembrane domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (Transmembrane [TM]-domain), and DsRed2 (Fluorescent [F]-domain). In vitro experiments clearly demonstrated that, after the probe was cleaved at the C-domain by the MMPs, the resultant TM-F-domain was inserted into the cellular membrane. Optical imaging experiments in vivo demonstrated that the probe was cleaved and specifically remained in tumor xenografts in a MMP-dependent manner. These results indicate that the release of the I-C-domain through the proteolytic cleavage of the C-domain by MMP2 and MT1-MMP triggers the tagging of cellular membranes with the TM-F-domain. The present feasibility study opens the door to the development of a novel imaging probe for tumor malignancy using positron emission tomography as well as an optical imaging device.<newchar><newabs>11444923<newchar>Extensive myocardial remodeling occurs after transmural myocardial infarction (MI). The infarcted myocardium is being replaced by scar tissue after gradual resorption of the necrotic tissue. The remodeling process involves both synthesis and degradation of collagens as major components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In the present study we have analyzed the time-dependent changes of the processes related to this fibrosis in the infarct area and in the non-infarcted left ventricle (LV) six hours to 82 days after occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) in rats. We also examined whether changes occurred in the expression pattern of the transforming growth factor (TGF) beta isoforms, since this cytokine is known as powerful inductor of fibrosis. Elevation in colligin expression preceded the pronounced increase in mRNA expression of both type I and type III collagen after MI from day three onwards. The maximal increase in colligin protein in the infarct area coincided with the most pronounced expression of collagen I and collagen III mRNA expression. Also, the expression and activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase (TIMP)-2 mRNA were increased predominantly in the infarct area. TGF beta(1)and TGF-beta(2)expression increased within the first days after MI, whereas TGF-beta(3)expression was elevated predominantly in the infarct area. This pronounced increase in TGF-beta(3)persisted up to 82 days and correlated positively with the parameters of ECM metabolism. Thus, the scar formation is an ongoing dynamic process in which TGF-beta(3)seems to play an active role in the complex ventricular remodeling.<newchar><newabs>19900459<newchar>Collagen fiber assembly affects many physiological processes and is tightly controlled by collagen-binding proteins. However, to what extent membrane-bound versus cell-secreted collagen-binding proteins affect collagen fibrillogenesis is not well understood. In our previous studies, we had demonstrated that the membrane-anchored extracellular domain (ECD) of the collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2) inhibits fibrillogenesis of collagen endogenously secreted by the cells. These results led to a novel functional role of the DDR2 ECD. However, since soluble forms of DDR1 and DDR2 containing its ECD are known to naturally exist in the extracellular matrix, in this work we investigated if these soluble DDR ECDs may have a functional role in modulating collagen fibrillogenesis. For this purpose, we created mouse osteoblast cell lines stably secreting DDR1 or DDR2 ECD as soluble proteins. Transmission electron microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and hydroxyproline assays were used to demonstrate that DDR ECD expression reduced the rate and quantity of collagen deposition and induced significant changes in fiber morphology and matrix mineralization. Collectively, our studies advance our understanding of DDR receptors as powerful regulators of collagen deposition in the ECM and elucidate their multifaceted role in ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>19795413<newchar>Celiac disease (CD) is an enteropathy triggered by gluten and mediated by CD4+ T cells. A complete understanding of CD immunopathogenesis has been hindered due to the lack of adequate in vivo models. Here, we explored the effect of the inhibition of COX by indomethacin in wheat gliadin-sensitized transgenic mice expressing the HLA-DQ8 heterodimer, a molecule associated with CD. Treated mice showed a gliadin-specific immune response with a significant reduction of villus height, not linked to crypt hyperplasia and to expansion of intraepithelial T cells. Notably, treated mice showed increased numbers of CD25+ and apoptotic cells in the lamina propria, whereas high basal levels of IFN-gamma secretion, along with a reduced gliadin-specific IL-2 expression were detected in MLN. Biochemical assessment of the lesion revealed increased mRNA of Lamb3 and Adamts2, encoding for ECM proteins, and enhanced activities of metalloproteinases MMP1, 2 and 7. We conclude that an intestinal sensitivity to gliadin, in connection with COX inhibition, caused a decreased villus height in DQ8 tg mice. The lesion was induced by a deregulated mucosal cell immunity to gliadin, thus triggering activation of a specific ECM protein pathway responsible for lamina propria remodeling.<newchar><newabs>19626416<newchar>Much of the specification for the basic embryonic body plan is the result of a hierarchy of developmental decisions at different developmental times. The extracellular matrix (ECM) appears to be a very dynamic structure during embryogenesis. One of the mesenchymal ECM proteins, tenascin, is reported to be transiently expressed during embryonic tissue development, and is absent or much reduced in most fully developed organs. The respiratory system is an outgrowth of the ventral wall of the foregut, and the epithelium of the larynx, trachea, bronchi and alveoli is of endodermal origin. The cartilaginous and muscular components are of mesodermal origin. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of tenascin-C (TNC) in the developing human lung, during the pseudoglandular, canalicular and saccular stage of lung maturation. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from the lungs of 30 embryos (10 corresponding to the 10th to the 16th gestational week (pseudoglandular stage), 10 to the 17th to the 23rd gestational week (canalicular stage), and 10 to the 24th to the 27th gestational week (saccular stage), were investigated by conventional histology and immunohistology for the expression levels of TNC. The changes observed in the distribution patterns suggest that during embryogenesis, the rate of tenascin synthesis changes significantly. During the pseudoglandular stage, the density of cells expressing TNC was higher in the condensing mesenchyme surrounding the epithelial glands than in the epithelial cells, whereas the inverse result was observed during the canalicular stage. During the saccular stage the pattern of immunoreactivity with TNC was lower than those of the pseudoglandular and canalicular stage, either in epithelial or mesenchymal cells, but it was highly expressed in the basement membranes. This restricted spatiotemporal distribution suggests that tenascin has a key role (1) in mesenchymal tissue remodeling during the pseudoglandular stage, a period that describes the development of the complete bronchial tree and (2) on the epithelial cell shape and function during the canalicular stage, a period that describes the formation of pneumocytes type I and pneumocytes type II. The later, will produce the surfactant, a phospholipid-rich fluid capable of lowering surface tension at the air-alveolar interface. During the saccular stage, tenascin was present mainly in the basement membranes surrounding the acinar and vascular structures, indicating a supporting and mechanical role.<newchar><newabs>19607919<newchar>The extension of multiple oligodendroglial branched processes towards axons is an important event during the early stages of myelination that likely requires remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) microenvironment via matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Here we investigated whether fibronectin-mediated inhibition of myelin sheet formation in oligodendrocytes correlated with an altered MMP activity. Our data reveal that fibronectin enhanced, in a PKC-dependent manner, the net activity of MMP-9, but not its expression, in conditioned medium of oligodendrocytes. Residual cellular MMP-9 activity on fibronectin was confined to the cell body, whereas MMP-9 activity on laminin-2 was localized along extending processes of oligodendrocytes. The mislocalization of MMP-9 activity on fibronectin correlated with a perturbed outgrowth of oligodendroglial processes. In conclusion, our findings suggest that ECM molecules influence both the net activity of secreted MMP and the spatial distribution of cell-associated MMP activity, and thereby morphological oligodendrocyte differentiation.<newchar><newabs>20027372<newchar>Elevated levels of tissue crosslinking are associated with numerous diseases (cancer stroma, organ fibrosis), and also eliminate the otherwise remarkable clinical successes of tissue-derived scaffolds, instead eliciting a foreign body reaction. Nevertheless, it is not well understood how the initial physical and biochemical properties of cellular microenvironments, stem cell niches, or of 3D tissue scaffolds guide the assembly and remodeling of new extracellular matrix (ECM) that is ultimately sensed by cells. Here, we incorporated FRET-based mechanical strain sensors, either into cell-derived ECM scaffolds or into the fibronectin (Fn) matrix assembled by reseeded fibroblasts, and demonstrated the following. Cell-generated tensile forces change the conformation of Fn in both 3D scaffolds and new matrix over time. The time course by which new matrix fibers are stretched by reseeded cells is accelerated by scaffold crosslinking. Importantly, stretching Fn fibers increases their elastic modulus (rigidity) and alters their biochemical display. Regulated by Fn fiber unfolding, more soluble Fn binds to the native than to the crosslinked scaffolds. Additionally, matrix assembly of fibroblasts is decreased by scaffold crosslinking. Taken together, scaffold crosslinking has a multifactorial impact on the microenvironment that reseeded cells assemble and respond to, with far-reaching implications for tissue engineering and disease physiology.<newchar><newabs>19720393<newchar>Vascular injury increases access and binding of plasma-derived factor VII to perivascular cell membrane-bound tissue factor (TF). The resulting TF/VIIa complex promotes hemostasis by cleaving pro-thrombin to thrombin leading to the fibrin clot. In human pregnancy, decidual cell-expressed TF prevents decidual hemorrhage (abruption). During placentation, trophoblasts remodel decidual spiral arteries into high conductance vessels. Shallow trophoblast invasion impedes decidual vascular conversion, producing an inadequate uteroplacental blood flow that elicits abruption-related placental ischemia. Thrombin induces several biological effects via cell surface protease activated receptors. In first trimester human DCs thrombin increases synthesis of sFlt-1, which elicits placental ischemia by impeding angiogenesis-related decidual vascular remodeling. During pregnacy, the fibrillar collagen-rich amnion and choriodecidua extracellular matrix (ECM) provides greater than additive tensile strength and structural integrity. Thrombin acts as an autocrine/paracrine mediator that degrades these ECMs by augmenting decidual cell expression of: 1) matrix metalloproteinases and 2) interleukin-8, a key mediator of abruption-associated decidual infiltration of neutrophils, which express several ECM degrading proteases. Among the cell types at the maternal fetal interface at term, TF expression is highest in decidual cells indicating that this TF meets the hemostatic demands of labor and delivery. TF expression in cultured term decidual cells is enhanced by progestin and thrombin suggesting that the maintenance of elevated circulating progesterone provides hemostatic protection and that abruption-generated thrombin acts in an autocrine/paracrine fashion on decidual cells to promote hemostasis via enhanced TF expression.<newchar><newabs>22934319<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a serine protease (8, 9). The uPA/uPA receptor (uPAR) system is responsible for tissue degradation after plasminogen activation to plasmin, which leads to a cascade of proteolysis or thrombolysis, depending on the physiological conditions. uPA also directly activates MMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and human growth factor (10). Malignant tumors often express high levels of uPA and uPAR (11); therefore, the uPA/uPAR system is linked to vascular diseases and cancer. The synthetic peptide Asp-cyclohexylalanine-Phe-d-Ser-d-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Trp-Ser (AE105) has been identified to have a high affinity (dissociation constant for human uPAR (Kd) = 0.4 nM) (12), and AE105 has been labeled with (64)Cu (T1/2 = 12.7 h, β(+) = 17.8%) as (64)Cu-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N',N'',N'''-tetraacetic acid-AE105 ((64)Cu-DOTA-AE105) for use in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of uPAR expression in tumors (13). Persson et al. (14) extended the evaluation of AE105 in PET and biodistribution studies with (64)Cu-DOTA-AE105-NH2.<newchar><newabs>22514807<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Tumor angiogenesis represents a continuous and important process in tumor development in which the tumor attempts to gain an independent blood supply (4). This process is driven by the tumor's overproduction of angiogenic factors, which bind to receptors on nearby vessel endothelial cells. Angiogenesis is essential for the growth of solid tumors and their metastases. Imaging angiogenesis may be useful for monitoring angiogenic treatments of tumors and cardiovascular diseases (5-7). Aminopeptidase N (APN, CD13) is a membrane-bound glycoprotein with MMP activity that cleaves unsubstituted N-terminal amino acids with neutral side chains from peptides (8). APN has been shown to play a role in tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (9). In addition to endothelial cells of angiogenic vessels, most cells of myeloid origin, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and smooth muscle cells also express CD13 (10, 11). High levels of CD13 expression were found in solid tumors and tumor vasculatures. Probestin ((2S,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoyl-l-Leu-l-Pro-l-Pro) is a competitive inhibitor of APN with an inhibition constant (Ki) value of 20 nM. Pathuri et al. (12) prepared (99m)TcO-N,N-dimethylglycyl-l-lysinyl-l-cysteinylamide-8-amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic-probestin ((99m)TcO-N3S-PEG2-probestin) as a single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) for imaging APN expression in tumors in mice.<newchar><newabs>22649804<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). There are four members of endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which regulate the activity of MMPs leading to inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis (9, 10). TIMP-2 (TIMP2) is a bifunctional inhibitor of angiogenesis by inhibition of proteinase activity of MMPs and endothelial cell proliferation via binding to α3β1 (the N-terminal domain) and by MMP-independent anti-angiogenic activity (the C-terminal domain) (11, 12). Kang et al. (13) fused the N-terminal domain of TIMP2 to the C-terminus of human serum albumin (HSA) to form HSA/TIMP2 fusion protein (HSA-TIMP2), which is readily secreted by the transfected yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. HSA-TIMP2 retains its anti-angiogenic activity at the C-terminal domain with little MMP inhibitory activity at the N-terminal domain. Lee et al. (14) have evaluated Cy5.5-HSA/TIMP2 (Cy5.5-HSA-TIMP2) for in vivo near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging of rat prostate MLL tumors in nude mice showing maximum tumor accumulation at 2 d after injection. Integrins are a family of heterodimeric glycoproteins on cell surfaces that mediate diverse biological events involving cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions (15). Integrins consist of an α and a β subunit and are important for cell adhesion and signal transduction. The αvβ3 integrin is the most prominent receptor affecting tumor growth, tumor invasiveness, metastasis, tumor-induced angiogenesis, inflammation, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis (16-21). Expression of the αvβ3 integrin is strong on tumor cells and activated endothelial cells, whereas expression is weak on resting endothelial cells and most normal tissues. The peptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) has been identified as a recognition motif used by extracellular matrix proteins (vitronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, and collagen) to bind to a variety of integrins, including αvβ3. The αvβ3 antagonists are being studied as anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic agents (18, 22, 23). Various radiolabeled RGD peptides (antagonists) have been introduced for imaging of tumors and tumor angiogenesis (24). Choi et al. (25) conjugated multiple c(RGDfK) peptides to HSA-TIMP2 to enhance the binding capacity of the protein (RGD-HSA-TIMP2) to tumors and their vasculatures. (68)Ga-NOTA-RGD-HSA-TIMP2 and (68)Ga-NOTA-HSA-TIMP2 have been studied as potential positron emission tomography (PET) probes for imaging αvβ3 integrin receptors in nude mice bearing human glioblastoma U87MG tumors.<newchar><newabs>21491704<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, inflammation, myocardial infraction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-8). The gelatinase family is a subgroup of MMPs consisting of gelatinase A (MMP-2) and gelatinase B (MMP-9) (9). Gelatinase expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of gelatinases have been found in tumors that are associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (10). A number of synthetic MMP inhibitors have been developed to block the activated MMPs in pathological conditions (11). A tumor cell targeting peptide, Gly-Ala-Cys-Leu-Arg-Ser-Gly-Arg-Gly-Cys-Gly (TCTP-1), was identified via phage display screening against MMP-9. Ujula et al. (12) prepared a cyc-cys cyclicpeptide, Gly-Ala-Cys-Leu-Arg-Ser-Gly-Arg-Gly-Cys-Gly-(PEG)3-DOTA-(68)Ga ((68)Ga-DOTA-TCTP-1), for preliminary evaluation of MMP-9 overexpression in tumors.<newchar><newabs>22593944<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for the permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). The peptide Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-NH2 (GPLGVR) was found to be a MMP2/9 substrate and is cleaved between the Gly (G) and Val (V) residues (9). Chuang et al. (10) linked a hydrophilic polyethylene glycol (PEG) group to the N-terminus of Cys-Arg-Ser-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Tyr-Lys-Lys (CRSGPLGVYKK) and a hydrophobic tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) molecule to the C-terminus Lys (K) residue to form PEG-CRSGPLGVYKK-TMR (PEG-peptide-TMR) for optical imaging of protease activity in vivo. Upon MMP cleavage, the lipophilic VYKK-TMR was released and accumulated at the sites (cell surface) of protease activity. The accumulation was most likely attributed to the binding of the lipophilic VYKK-TMR to the cell membrane non-specifically. For positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, the other Lys residue in PEG-peptide-TMR was labeled with 4-[(18)F]fluorobenzoate to form PEG-peptide-[(18)F]-TMR. PEG-peptide-[(18)F]-TMR accumulated in HT1080 tumors (with high MMP2 expression) but not in MCF-7 tumors (with low MMP2 expression), as determined with optical imaging in nude mice.<newchar><newabs>21938858<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to monitor biological functions of specific targets in small animals (1-3). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low fluorescence background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence (NIRF) imaging is becoming a noninvasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals (4, 5). Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (6). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (7). ECM provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (8). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (9-12). MMP expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (13). A peptide, Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-NH2, was found to be a MMP substrate and is cleaved between Leu and Gly residues. Lee et al. (14) used this sequence with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to AuNPs to form fluorescence-quenched Cy5.5-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-AuNPs (Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, resulting in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer to Au. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Leu-Gly bond is cleaved by MMPs, releasing fragments containing Cy5.5. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with absorbance maximum at 675 nm and emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M−(1)cm−(1). Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs are being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMP expression in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases. Ferritin is composed of 24 subunits of heavy and light chains that self-assemble to form a cage-like nanoparticle (nanocage) at physiological pH (7.4) with internal and external diameters of 8 nm and 12 nm (15, 16), respectively. The outer surface of ferritin can be chemically or genetically modified with ligands, and the cavity of ferritin can capture metal ions with high affinity (17). Lin et al. (18) chemically coupled Cy5.5-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys and black hole quencher-3 (BHQ-3) onto heavy chain ferritin to form C-Fn and B-Fn, respectively. Hybridization of C-Fn and B-Fn (1:1) resulted in the formation of C/B-Fn nanocages. The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity to BHQ-3, resulting in fluorescence quenching. NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Leu-Gly bond is cleaved by MMPs, releasing fragments containing Cy5.5. C/B-Fn nanocages have been developed for NIRF imaging of tumor vasculature to study in vivo biodistribution of the tracer in tumor-bearing mice.<newchar><newabs>20641627<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to visualize biological functions of specific targets in small animals (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (NIRF; 700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIRF imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, hyaluronate, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). ECM molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been used as X-ray and optical contrast agents in small animals with little toxicity (5). By combining AuNPs and fluorophore, the versatility of Au-fluorophore interactions allows detection of the presence of the AuNPs with fluorescence spectroscopy using NP surface energy transfer (NSET) (6, 7). NSET provides low noise/signal ratios and covers a distance of ~20 nm for metal–fluorophore interactions. Deep tissue imaging can be obtained with the use of NIR dyes. Hyaluronic acid (HA, also known as hyaluronan or hyaluronate) is a high molecular weight linear glycosaminoglycan widely distributed throughout connective, epithelial, and neural tissues and is a hyaluronidase (HAdase) substrate (8-10). The receptor for HA is CD44. HA provides a target for CD44-mediated adhesion of normal and cancer cells (11, 12). Elevated extracellular levels of HA and its partially catabolized oligomers are found in certain malignancies and inflammation (13, 14). Lee et al. (15) conjugated HA with NIR dye HiLyte Fluor 647 to AuNPs (HHAuNPs) for noninvasive detection of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and HAdase activity.<newchar><newabs>23586113<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for the permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). The peptide Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-NH2 (PLGVR) was found to be a MMP substrate and is cleaved between the Gly (G) and Val (V) residues (9). Huang et al. (10) linked a fluorescence quencher BBQ650 to the N-terminus of Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Lys-Glu-Lys (PLGVRKEK), a Cy5.5 molecule to the Lys closer to BBQ650, and a DOTA molecule to the ɣ-amino group of the C-terminus Lys (K) residue to form BBQ650-PLGVR-K(Cy5.5)-E-K(DOTA)-OH for optical imaging of protease activity in vivo. Upon MMP cleavage, VR-K(Cy5.5)-E-K(DOTA)-OH is released with a greater fluorescence signal and accumulated at the sites of protease activity. For positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, the agent was labeled with (64)Cu to form BBQ650-PLGVR-K(Cy5.5)-E-K((64)Cu-DOTA)-OH. BBQ650-PLGVR-K(Cy5.5)-E-K((64)Cu-DOTA)-OH accumulated in human U87MG glioblastoma xenografts as determined with optical imaging in nude mice.<newchar><newabs>20641511<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Tumor angiogenesis represents a continuous and important process in tumor development in which the tumor attempts to gain an independent blood supply (4). This process is driven by the tumor's overproduction of angiogenic factors, which bind to receptors on nearby vessel endothelial cells. Angiogenesis is essential for the growth of solid tumors and their metastases. Imaging angiogenesis may be useful for monitoring angiogenic treatments of tumors and cardiovascular diseases (5-7). Aminopeptidase N (APN, CD13) is a membrane bound glycoprotein with MMP activity that cleaves unsubstituted, N-terminal amino acids with neutral side chains from peptides (8). APN has been shown to play a role in tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (9). In addition to endothelial cells of angiogenic vessels, most cells of myeloid origin, epithelial cells, fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells also express CD13 (10, 11). The tumor homing peptide cyclo(Cys-Asn-Gly-Arg-Cys)-Gly-Lys (cNGR) contains the Asn-Gly-Arg (NGR) motif that binds to APN (12). von Wallbrunn et al. (13) prepared Cy5.5-labeled cNGR (Cy5.5-cNGR) for imaging APN expression in tumors.<newchar><newabs>19115640<newchar>It has been found that various extracellular matrix (ECM) probably play an important role in the occurrence of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), including structural proteins, adhesive proteins, anti-adhesive proteins, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP) Structural proteins, including collagen and elastic fiber family, are the major non-cellular components of PVR membrane, and could promote contraction of membrane. Adhesive proteins, including fibronectin, vitronectin, laminin, could promote adhesion between cells and ECM in PVR, they promote the attachment, migration and differentiation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Anti-adhesive proteins, including thrombospondin-1, osteonectin, tenascin, could promote RPE migration and tissue remodeling of PVR, etc. MMPs and TIMPs could degrade some components of ECM, enhance permeability of blood vessel and promote neovascularization in PVR.<newchar><newabs>20641641<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to study biological functions of specific targets (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (650–900 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (5). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infraction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (6-9). The gelatinase family is a subgroup of MMPs consisting of gelatinase A (MMP-2) and gelatinase B (MMP-9) (10). Gelatinase expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of gelatinases have been found in tumors that are associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (11). A synthetic protected graft copolymer (PGC) consisting of poly-L-lysine (PL) with multiple methoxypolyethylene glycol (MPEG) side chains has been used as a drug carrier with efficient accumulation in tumors (12, 13). A peptide, GGPRQITAG, was found to be a MMP-2/9 substrate from a phage library and is cleaved between Gln (Q) and Ile (I) residues (14). Chen et al. (15) used this sequence with linking residues GGPRQITAGK(Fitc)C with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to the unmodified PL side chains to form a fluorescence-quenched polymer, Cy5.5-GGPRQITAGK(Fitc)C-PL-MPEG (Cy5.5-MMP-PGC). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which results in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Gln-Ile bond is cleaved by MMP-2/9, releasing fragments that contain Cy5.5. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescence dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). Cy5.5-MMP-PGC is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMP-2/9 proteolytic activity in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases (15, 16).<newchar><newabs>19331819<newchar>Localization of proteases to the surface of endothelial cells and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are essential to endothelial cell tube formation and angiogenesis. Here, we partially localized active cathepsin B and its cell surface binding partners, S100A/p11 (p11) of the annexin II heterotetramer (AIIt), to caveolae of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Via a live-cell proteolysis assay, we observed that degradation products of quenched-fluorescent (DQ)-proteins (i.e. gelatin and collagen IV) colocalized intracellularly with caveolin-1 (cav-1) of HUVEC grown in either monolayer cultures or in vitro tube formation assays. Activity-based probes that bind covalently to active cysteine cathepsins and degradation products of DQ-collagen IV partially localized to intracellular vesicles that contained cav-1 and active cysteine cathepsins. Biochemical analyses revealed that the distribution of active cathepsin B in caveolar fractions increased during in vitro tube formation. Pro-uPA, uPAR, MMP-2 and MMP-14, which have been linked with cathepsin B to ECM degradation pathways, were also found to increase in caveolar fractions during in vitro tube formation. Our findings are the first to demonstrate through live-cell imaging ECM degradation in association with active cathepsin B in caveolae of endothelial cells during tube formation.<newchar><newabs>18553108<newchar>Although the actions of cyclosporin (CyA) on keratinocyte are well established, little is known about its effects on dermal fibroblasts. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is one of the inflammatory cytokines playing a pivotal role in certain skin diseases such as psoriasis. The aim of this study has been to determine whether CyA modifies the metabolism of extracellular matrix (ECM) by human fibroblasts in vitro. CyA altered the morphology of fibroblasts in the collagen matrix. Fibroblast proliferation was suppressed by CyA at 100 and 10 ng/ml. The production of type I collagen and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 was also suppressed by CyA at 1000 ng/ml, and co-stimulation with IL-6 enhanced decreased production at 1000 and 100 ng/ml CyA. The production of matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) was also suppressed by CyA in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, the decreased production of MMP-1 was restored at 0.1-100 ng/ml CyA in the presence of IL-6. Regardless of the presence or absence of IL-6, the production of MMP-2 decreased at 1000 and 100 ng/ml, whereas the production of MMP-9 was unchanged. The production of transforming growth factor-beta decreased at 100 ng/ml CyA. This study thus indicates that CyA influences ECM metabolism and the proliferation of human dermal fibroblasts, and that the effects of CyA are modulated by IL-6. CyA might also, in part, improve psoriatic skin by regulating the remodeling of ECM and by its action on immunocompetent cells.<newchar><newabs>20641985<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly being used to monitor biological functions of specific targets in small animals (1-3). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the natural background fluorescence interference of biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues in small animals. NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background fluorescence as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. NIR fluorophores also have high sensitivity, attributable to low background fluorescence, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (4). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (5). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (6). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (7-10). The gelatinase family is a subgroup of MMPs consisting of gelatinase A (MMP-2) and gelatinase B (MMP-9) (11). Gelatinase expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of gelatinases have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (12). A cyclic peptide, c(CTTHWGFTLC)NH2 (C1), was identified by phage screening to be potent inhibitor of MMP-2 and MMP-9 (13); however, C1 is readily degraded in vivo. A synthetic peptide, c(KAHWGFTLD)NH2 (C6), was linked with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule via the α-NH2 of Lys to form Cy5.5-C6 for in vivo imaging of MMP-2/-9 activity (14). Cy5.5-C6 is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMP-2/-9 proteolytic activity in tumors.<newchar><newabs>19104038<newchar>Mutations in the a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) family of secreted proteases cause diseases linked to ECM abnormalities. However, the mechanisms by which these enzymes modulate the ECM during development are mostly unexplored. The Caenorhabditis elegans MIG-17/ADAMTS protein is secreted from body wall muscle cells and localizes to the basement membrane (BM) of the developing gonad where it controls directional migration of gonadal leader cells. Here we show that specific amino acid changes in the ECM proteins fibulin-1C (FBL-1C) and type IV collagen (LET-2) result in bypass of the requirement for MIG-17 activity in gonadal leader cell migration in a nidogen (NID-1)-dependent and -independent manner, respectively. The MIG-17, FBL-1C and LET-2 activities are required for proper accumulation of NID-1 at the gonadal BM. However, mutant FBL-1C or LET-2 in the absence of MIG-17 promotes NID-1 localization. Furthermore, overexpression of NID-1 in mig-17 mutants substantially rescues leader cell migration defects. These results suggest that functional interactions among BM molecules are important for MIG-17 control of gonadal leader cell migration. We propose that FBL-1C and LET-2 act downstream of MIG-17-dependent proteolysis to recruit NID-1 and that LET-2 also activates a NID-1-independent pathway, thereby inducing the remodeling of the BM required for directional control of leader cell migration.<newchar><newabs>18603422<newchar>Integrin receptors for extracellular matrix (ECM) are critical determinants of biological processes. Regulation of integrin expression is one way for cells to respond to changes in the ECM, to integrate intracellular signals, and to obtain appropriate adhesion for cell motility, proliferation, and differentiation. Transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms for changing the integrin repertoire at the cell surface have recently been described. These mechanisms work through transcriptional regulation that alters the proportions of one integrin relative to another, referred to as integrin switching, or through localized regulation of integrin-ECM interactions, thus providing exquisite control over cell rearrangements during tissue morphogenesis and remodeling. These integrin regulatory pathways may also be important targets in such emerging fields as tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.<newchar><newabs>18772849<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) comprise a family of over 20 structurally related proteins which are zinc-dependent and calcium-activated endopeptidases. The members of this family are able to degrade most extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and are thus involved in tissue remodeling and contribute to cell migration by eliminating extracellular matrix and basement membrane barriers. Of the MMPs, MMP-2 and MMP-9 are especially active in the degradation of type IV collagen, the main constituent of the basement membrane. MMPs also cleave a variety of non-ECM proteins, including cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. MMPs and their inhibitors (TIMPs) play important roles in physiological processes such as embryogenesis and wound healing; however, these enzymes are also involved in the pathogeneses of many diseases, such as cancer and atherosclerosis. In these pathological conditions the balance between MMPs and TIMPs shifts in favor of MMPs, resulting in excessive degradation of ECM. Research results published recently show that these enzymes can also be involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus and diabetic complications such as diabetic retinopathy. MMP-9 has the ability to degrade insulin and is able to activate IL-8, the main chemoattractant factor for neutrophils and monocytes. In addition, MMP-9 enables infl ammatory cell migration and pancreas colonization by eliminating the basement membrane barriers. Type IV collagenases are also important for endothelial cell invasion occurring during neovascularization (diabetic retinopathy), as angiogenesis needs extracellular matrix degradation; what is more, these enzymes are able to degrade pigment epithelium-derived factor, which is the principal antiangiogenic protein of the eye.<newchar><newabs>20641551<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to obtain biological functions of specific targets (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (5). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (6-9). MMP expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (10). The peptide aminohexanoic acid(AXH)-RPLALWRS-(AXH)-C (M7) was found to be a MMP-7 substrate that is cleaved between the L and W residues. Scherer et al. (11) used this sequence with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to a Generation 4–polyamidoamine-polyethylene glycol (PEG)-AF750 dendrimer to form fluorescence-quenched dendrimer, Cy5.5-(AXH)-RPLALWRS-(AXH)-C-G4-PAMAM-PEG-AF750 (PB-M7NIR). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which results in fluorescence quenching because of the close proximity of the Cy5.5 molecules. AF750 molecules are conjugated to the dendrimer and act as an internal fluorescence reference. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the L-W bond is cleaved by MMP-7, releasing Cy5.5-containing fragments. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). PB-M7NIR is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMP-7 expression in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases.<newchar><newabs>20641223<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Gold has not been used as an X-ray contrast agent in vivo. Gold has a higher atomic number and a higher absorption coefficient than iodine, providing 2.7-fold greater contrast/weight than iodine (4). Furthermore, imaging gold at 80–100 keV reduces interference from bone absorption and provides lower soft tissue absorption, which would reduce radiation to patients. Hainfeld et al. (4) used gold nanoparticles (AuNPs; 1.9 nm in diameter, ~50 kDa) as a computed tomography (CT) contrast agent in mice; these experiments showed enhanced CT contrast of the vasculature, kidneys, and tumor in mice. However, plasma proteins in blood adsorb onto the surface of bare AuNPs, which produces large aggregates (5) that may result in altered pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of AuNPs (6). Polyethylene glycol (PEG) has been found to minimize nonspecific adsorption of proteins onto NPs and to reduce their uptake by the liver (6). PEG-AuNPs have been being studied as cancer CT imaging and photothermal agents (7). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis and tumor invasion and metastases (8-11). MMP expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (12). The peptide Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-NH2 was found to be a MMP substrate and is cleaved between Leu and Gly residues. Lee et al. (13) used this sequence with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to AuNPs to form fluorescence-quenched nanoparticles (Cy5.5-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-AuNPs (Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs)). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which results in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer to Au. The NIR fluorescence signal increases when the Leu-Gly bond is cleaved by MMPs, releasing Cy5.5-containing fragments. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with absorbance maximum at 675 nm and emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs are being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMPs expressed in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases.<newchar><newabs>16986166<newchar>Cardiac remodeling involves the accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins including fibronectin (FN). FN contains RGD motifs that bind integrins at DDX sequences allowing signaling from the ECM to the nucleus. We noted that the natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPR-A) sequence contains both RGD and DDX sequences. The goal of the current investigation was to determine potential interactions between FN and NPR-A on BNP induction of cGMP in cultured human cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). Further, we sought to determine whether a Mayo designed NPR-A specific RGD peptide could modify this interaction. Here we reconfirm the presence of all three natriuretic peptide receptors (NPR) in CFs. CFs plated on FN demonstrated a pronounced increase in cGMP production to BNP compared to non-coated plates. This production was also enhanced by the NPR-A specific RGD peptide, which further augmented FN associated cGMP production. Addition of HS-142-1, a NPR-A/B antagonist, abrogated the responses of BNP to both FN and the NPR-A specific RGD peptide. Finally, we defined a possible role for the NPR-C through non-cGMP mechanisms in mediating the anti-proliferative actions of BNP in CFs where the NPR-C antagonist cANF 4-28 but not HS-142-1 blocked BNP-mediated inhibition of proliferation of CFs. We conclude that NPR-A interacts with components of the ECM such as FN to enhance BNP activation of cGMP and that a small NPR-A specific RGD peptide augments this action of BNP with possible therapeutic implications. Lastly, the NPR-C may also have a role in mediating anti-proliferative actions of BNP in CFs.<newchar><newabs>16825321<newchar>We previously showed that the cysteine protease cathepsin S (CTSS), known to degrade several components of the extracellular matrix (ECM), is produced by human adipose cells and increased in obesity. Because ECM remodeling is a key process associated with adipogenesis, this prompted us to assess the potential role of CTSS to promote preadipocyte differentiation. Kinetic studies in primary human preadipocytes revealed a modest increase in CTSS gene expression and secretion at the end of differentiation. CTSS activity was maximal in preadipocyte culture medium but decreased thereafter, fitting with increased release of the CTSS endogenous inhibitor, cystatin C, during differentiation. Inhibition of CTSS activity by an exogenous-specific inhibitor added along the differentiation, resulted in a 2-fold reduction of lipid content and expression of adipocyte markers in differentiated cells. Conversely, the treatment of preadipocytes with human recombinant CTSS increased adipogenesis. Moreover, CTSS supplementation in preadipocyte media markedly reduced the fibronectin network, a key preadipocyte-ECM component, the decrease of which is required for adipogenesis. Using immunohistochemistry on serial sections of adipose tissue of obese subjects, we showed that adipose cells staining positive for CTSS are mainly located in the vicinity of fibrosis regions containing fibronectin. Herein we propose that CTSS may promote human adipogenesis, at least in part, by degrading fibronectin in the early steps of differentiation. Taken together, these results indicate that CTSS released locally by preadipocytes promotes adipogenesis, suggesting a possible contribution of this protease to fat mass expansion in obesity.<newchar><newabs>16808670<newchar>Exciting studies involving the molecular regulation of lymphangiogenesis in lymphatic-associated disorders (e.g., wound healing, lymphedema and tumor metastasis) have focused renewed attention on the intrinsic relationship between lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) and extracellular matrix (ECM) microenvironment. ECM molecules and remodeling events play a key role in regulating lymphangiogenesis, and the &quot;functionality&quot;-relating molecules, especially hyaluronan, integrins, reelin, IL-7, and matrix metalloproteinases, provide the most fundamental and critical prerequisite for LEC growth, migration, tube formation, and survival, although lymphangiogenesis is directly or/and indirectly controlled by VEGF-C/-D/VEGFR- 3- Prox-1-, Syk/SLP76-, podoplanin/Ang-2/Nrp-2-, FOXC2-, and other signaling pathways in embryonic and pathological processes. New knowledge regarding the differentiation of initial lymphatics should enable improvements in understanding of a variety of cytokines, chemokines, and other factors. The lymphatic colocalization with histochemical staining by using the novel molecular markers (e.g., LYVE-1), along with subsequent injection technique with ferritin or some tracer, will reveal functional and structural features of newly formed and preexisting lymphatics. Growing recognition of the multiple functions of ECM and LEC molecules for important physiological and pathological events may be helpful in identifying the crucial changes in tissues subjected to lymph circulation and ultimately in the search for rational therapeutic approaches to prevent lymphatic-associated disorders.<newchar><newabs>16014617<newchar>The induction of T helper (TH) lymphocytes by distinct TH ligands results in a differentiation to TH1/TH2 subsets based on their unique pattern of cytokine secretion and effector functions. We hypothesized that the relative proportion of TH1/TH2 directly relates to cardiac fibroblast (CF) function and thereby cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and cardiac diastolic function in the absence of injury or altered wall stress. We compared the effect of selective TH1 with TH2 inducers on cardiac gene expression, ECM composition, and diastolic function in C57BL/J mice. Twelve weeks after immune modulation, the left ventricular stiffness (beta) was significantly increased in the TH1 group and decreased in the TH2 group (P &lt; 0.01). The TH2 group also demonstrated significantly increased end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes (P &lt; 0.01). Cardiac gene expression patterns for pro-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and -13 were increased by greater than fivefold in the TH2 group and significantly decreased in the TH1 group (P &lt; 0.05). The total cardiac collagen and cross-linked collagen were significantly increased in the TH1 group and decreased in the TH2 group (P &lt; 0.01). Coculturing lymphocytes harvested from the treated mice with naive primary CF demonstrated a direct control of the lymphocytes on CF pro-collagen, pro-MMP gene expression, and MMP activity. These results suggest that the TH phenotype differentially affects diastolic function through modulating CF pro-collagen and pro-MMP gene expression, MMP activity, and cardiac collagen cross-linking, resulting in altered ECM composition. Thus modulation of TH lymphocyte function could promote adaptive remodeling in heart failure and postmyocardial infarction.<newchar><newabs>22593948<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for the permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). The peptide Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-NH2 (GPLGVR) was found to be a MMP2/9 substrate and is cleaved between the Gly (G) and Val (V) residues (9). Chuang et al. (10) linked a hydrophilic polyethylene glycol (PEG) group to the N-terminus of Cys-Arg-Ser-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Tyr-Lys-Lys (CRSGPLGVYKK) and a hydrophobic tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) molecule to the C-terminus Lys (K) residue to form PEG-CRSGPLGVYKK-TMR (PEG-peptide-TMR) for optical imaging of protease activity in vivo. Upon MMP cleavage, the lipophilic VYKK-TMR is released and accumulated at the sites (cell surface) of protease activity. The accumulation was most likely attributed to the binding of the lipophilic VYKK-TMR to the cell membrane non-specifically. PEG-peptide-TMR accumulated in HT1080 tumors (with high MMP2 expression) but not in MCF-7 tumors (with low MMP2 expression), as determined with optical imaging in nude mice.<newchar><newabs>15844197<newchar>During heart organogenesis, the spatiotemporal organization of the extracellular matrix (ECM) undergoes significant remodeling. Because matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are known to be key regulators of cell-matrix interactions, we analyzed the role(s) of MMPs, and specifically MMP-2, in early heart development. Both MMP-2 neutralizing antibody and the broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor Ilomastat in a temporal manner, when applied between chick embryonic stages 5 (primitive streak stage) to stage 12 ( approximately 16-somites), produced severe heart tube defects. Exposure to the MMP inhibitor at stage 5 produced various degrees of cardia bifida. At the seven-somite stage, MMP-2/Ilomastat inhibition caused a shift in normal left-right patterning of cell proliferation within the dorsal mesocardium and mesoderm of the anterior heart field that correlated with a change in looping direction. MMP inhibition at the 10- to 12-somite stage resulted in an arrest of heart tube bending by inhibiting the breakdown of the dorsal mesocardial ECM. The experimental observations suggest that MMP activity regulates the coordination of early heart organogenesis by affecting ventral closure of the heart and gut tubes, asymmetric cell proliferation in the dorsal mesocardium to drive looping direction, and ECM degradation within the dorsal mesocardium allowing looping to proceed toward completion.<newchar><newabs>15174107<newchar>Biodegradation of collagen biomaterial matrices and the deposition of new collagen extracellular matrix (ECM) are critical to the integration of in vitro bioengineered materials and tissues in vivo. In previous studies, we observed significant impact of collagen matrix structure on primary lung fibroblast behavior in vitro. In the present work, to begin to understand the mechanistic basis for our previous observation, the response of human fibroblasts (IMR-90) to the structural state of collagen matrices was studied with respect to cell proliferation, cell morphology, beta-galactosidase level, and transcript content for collagen (Col-1), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1, MMP-2), tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase (TIMP-1 and TIMP-2). Collagen digestion was assessed quantitatively by uptake of collagen-coated fluorescent beads incorporated in the preformed collagen matrix. Transcript levels related to the deposition of new ECM proteins varied as a function of the structure of the collagen matrix presented to the cells. Col-1 expression was 2-fold higher and expression for MMP-1, MMP-2, TIMP-1, and TIMP-2 increased for cells when grown on 156 microg/cm2 denatured collagen compared with cells grown on tissue culture (TC) plastic. On 156 microg/cm2 nondenatured (native) collagen, Col-1 expression was decreased by half and MMP-2 was increased by 2.5-fold compared with cells grown on TC plastic. On 78 microg/cm2 denatured collagen, Col-1 expression was 80% whereas the MMPs and TIMPs were increased by 1.25- to 2-fold compared with cells grown on TC plastic. On 78 microg/cm2 nondenatured collagen expression of all 5 transcripts was reduced 60-90% of the levels determined for the cells grown on TC plastic. Cell viability, based on cell morphology and beta-galactosidase activity, was improved on the denatured collagen. A higher level of collagen matrix incorporation was observed for cells grown on denatured collagen than on nondenatured collagen or TC plastic. These data suggest that tissue engineering matrices incorporating denatured collagen may promote more active remodeling toward new ECM in comparison to cells grown on nondenatured collagen or cells grown on TC plastic.<newchar><newabs>17175151<newchar>The influence of alphaVbeta3 integrin on MT1-MMP functionality was studied in human breast cancer cells of differing beta3 integrin status. Overexpression of beta3 integrin caused increased cell surface expression of alphaV integrin and increased cellular adhesion to extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates in BT-549, MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. beta3 integrin expression also enhanced the migration of breast cancer cells on ECM substrates and enhanced collagen gel contraction. In vivo, alphaVbeta3 cooperated with MT1-MMP to increase the growth of MCF-7 cells after orthotopic inoculation in immunocompromised mice, but had no influence on in vitro proliferation. Despite these stimulatory effects, overexpression of beta3 integrin suppressed the type I collagen (Col I) induced MMP-2 activation in all breast cancer cell lines analyzed. This was also evident in extracts from the MCF-7 tumors in vivo, where MMP-2 activation was stimulated by MT1-MMP transfection, but attenuated with beta3 integrin expression. Although our studies confirm important biological effects of alphaVbeta3 integrin on enhancing cell adhesion and migration, ECM remodeling and tumor growth, beta3 integrin caused reduced MMP-2 activation in response to Col I in vitro, which appears to be physiologically relevant, as it was also seen in tumor xenografts in vivo. The reduction of MMP-2 activation (and thus MT1-MMP activity) by alphaVbeta3 in response to Col I may be important in scenarios where cells which are activated for matrix degradation need to preserve some pericellular collagen, perhaps as a substrate for cell adhesion and migration, thus maintaining a balanced level of proteolysis required for efficient tumor growth.<newchar><newabs>18787072<newchar>Sprouting angiogenesis is a multistep process consisting of basement membrane degradation, endothelial cell (EC) activation, proliferation, invasion, lumen formation, and sprout stabilization. Such complexity is consistent with a requirement for orchestration of individual gene expression alongside multiple signaling pathways. To better understand the mechanisms that direct the transformation of adherent ECs on the surface of collagen matrices to develop multicellular invading sprouts, we analyzed differential gene expression with time using a defined in vitro model of EC invasion driven by the combination of sphingosine-1-phosphate, basic FGF, and VEGF. Gene expression changes were confirmed by real-time PCR and Western blot analyses. A cohort of cell adhesion molecule genes involved in adherens junction and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions were upregulated, whereas a set of genes associated with tight junctions were downregulated. Numerous genes encoding ECM proteins and proteases were induced, indicating that biosynthesis and remodeling of ECM is indispensable for sprouting angiogenesis. Knockdown of a highly upregulated gene, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin-type repeats-1 (ADAMTS1), decreased invasion responses, confirming a role for ADAMTS1 in mediating EC invasion. Furthermore, differential expression of multiple members of the Wnt and Notch pathways was observed. Functional experiments indicated that inhibition and activation of the Notch signaling pathway stimulated and inhibited EC invasion responses, respectively. This study has enhanced the molecular road map of gene expression changes that occur during endothelial invasion and highlighted the utility of three-dimensional models to study EC morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>15289878<newchar>Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a tumor with local invasive behaviour. Tenascin-C (TN-C) with fibronectin (FN) are associated extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules frequently neo-expressed in stromal remodeling during neoplastic progression, mostly at the invasive edge of these tumors. Tenascin-C alone or in association with other ECM molecules, could play an important role in the process of tumor invasion, acting as substrate for movement or modulating the migration on FN or promoting the degradation of ECM. Three mesothelioma cell lines of different histotype were analysed for the adhesive capacity on TN-C. The haptotactic activity on TN and the TN modulation of migration on a substrate of FN were analysed by a Boyden modified chamber. The effects of TN on proteolytic activity was evaluated by zymography. None of the lines adhered to tenascin. TN-C was not haptotactic for the three cell lines. Soluble or solid TN reduced the migration on FN of epithelial (E-MM) and sarcomatous cell line (S-MM), whereas enhanced the movement of a byphasic cell line (B-MM). When the cells were pretreated with anti-integrin blocking antibodies we observed a different pattern of inhibition of migration on FN respect to FN plus TN. Finally, no difference of metalloprotease (MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-9) activity was observed between cells plated on FN and on FN plus TN, except for B-MM which showed an increased MMP-7 activity when TN was added to FN. Although TN is not a substrate for movement of MM cell lines, it interacts with FN by modulating differently the migration, according to the different histotype and to the integrin involved, and increasing specific metalloprotease activity.<newchar><newabs>17604848<newchar>Granzyme B is a major mediator of the cytotoxic immune response by inducing target cell death when internalized in the presence of perforin. Recently, several studies have focused on another role of granzyme B, which is extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling through the degradation of ECM proteins. In order to investigate the expression pattern of granzyme B in the lesion areas of atherosclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, we performed immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization analyses using human atherosclerotic plaques and the synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritic- and osteoarthritic-joints. In atherosclerotic plaques, granzyme B was expressed by macrophages in areas such as the boundary regions between media and intima, areas around necrotic cores, and in shoulder regions. In the synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritic-joints, the expression of granzyme B was strongly observed in the lining layers where the majority of cells are macrophages and also in perivascular areas where macrophages and a small number of lymphocytes were mixed to form diffuse cellular aggregates. Granzyme B-positive cells were not detected in osteoarthritic synovium. Furthermore, the expression of granzyme B has been induced in the human macrophage cell line, THP-1, by ECM proteins or agents which induce macrophage differentiation. These observations indicate that macrophages should be added to the list of cell types that express granzyme B in human inflammatory diseases and that granzyme B may play a role in macrophage functions that are associated with disease progression.<newchar><newabs>15205178<newchar>The airways of patients with chronic asthma commonly develop an element of fixed airway obstruction, which fails to reverse with inhaled beta2-adrenoceptor agonists. Airway remodeling refers to the structural changes of the bronchi in longstanding asthma and is characterized by increased deposition and altered ratios of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. We therefore assessed whether ECM proteins alter beta2-adrenoceptor signaling in human airway smooth muscle cells. We report that a fibronectin environment increases responses to beta2-adrenoceptor stimulation, whereas exposure to collagen V or laminin decreases accumulation of the second messenger cyclic AMP when compared with collagens I or IV. These differences are likely to be physiologically significant as they translate into altered phosphorylation of the downstream target VASP. The altered cAMP levels are due to differences in adenylyl cyclase activity, although expression of the relevant isoforms of enzyme appears unaltered. However, inhibition of Galphai abrogates the differences in beta2-adrenoceptor-mediated cAMP accumulation in cells exposed to different matrix factors. The difference in Galphai signaling is not due to altered Galphai expression. We conclude therefore that ECM modulates Galphai activity in human airway smooth muscle cells, and propose that these changes could contribute to the fixed airway obstruction seen in patients with chronic asthma.<newchar><newabs>15640212<newchar>The development of ectomycorrhizal symbiosis leads to drastic changes in gene expression in both partners. However, little is known about the spatial regulation of symbiosis-regulated genes. Using cDNA array profiling, we compared the levels of expression of fungal genes corresponding to approximately 1,200 expressed sequenced tags in the ectomycorrhizal root tips (ECM) and the connected extraradical mycelium (EM) for the Paxillus involutus-Betula pendula ectomycorrhizal association grown on peat in a microcosm system. Sixty-five unique genes were found to be differentially expressed in these two fungal compartments. In ECM, a gene coding for a putative phosphatidylserine decarboxylase (Psd) was up-regulated by 24-fold, while genes coding for urea (Dur3) and spermine (Tpo3) transporters were up-regulated 4.1- and 6.2-fold in EM. Moreover, urea was the major nitrogen compound found in EM by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. These results suggest that (i) there is a spatial difference in the patterns of fungal gene expression between ECM and EM, (ii) urea and polyamine transporters could facilitate the translocation of nitrogen compounds within the EM network, and (iii) fungal Psd may contribute to membrane remodeling during ectomycorrhiza formation.<newchar><newabs>15122322<newchar>S100A4(mts1) protein expression has been strongly associated with metastatic tumor progression. It has been suggested as a prognostic marker for a number of human cancers. It is proposed that extracellular S100A4 accelerates cancer progression by stimulating the motility of endothelial cells, thereby promoting angiogenesis. Here we show that in 3D culture mouse endothelial cells (SVEC 4-10) respond to recombinant S100A4 by stimulating invasive growth of capillary-like structures. The outgrowth is not dependent on the stimulation of cell proliferation, but rather correlates with the transcriptional modulation of genes involved in the proteolytic degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM). Treatment of SVEC 4-10 with the S100A4 protein leads to the transcriptional activation of collagenase 3 (MMP-13) mRNA followed by subsequent release of the protein from the cells. Beta-casein zymography demonstrates enhancement of proteolytic activity associated with MMP-13. This observation indicates that extracellular S100A4 stimulates the production of ECM degrading enzymes from endothelial cells, thereby stimulating the remodeling of ECM. This could explain the angiogenic and metastasis-stimulating activity of S100A4(mts1).<newchar><newabs>12706016<newchar>Cells that carry out wound healing must be able to perform catabolic as well as anabolic functions. As the tendon is a tissue rich in extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, we hypothesized that cells which participate in tendon healing should be able to produce proteases that would allow the remodeling of such a tissue. To this end, we assessed the ability of endotenon cells isolated from canine flexor digitorum profundus tendon and from surrounding parietal sheath to produce the gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9. Endotenon and sheath cells cultured in vitro on polystyrene produced small amounts of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was not detectable. When cultured on polystyrene coated with type I collagen, the cells upregulated MMP-2 production and MMP-9 production was induced. No other ECM protein elicited this response nor did other cell lines respond in this way after attachment to type I collagen. The two gelatinases were identified by immunological methods, ability to bind gelatin, size, metal ion requirement, serine protease inhibitor insensitivity, and APMA activation. For cells grown on collagen-coated plastic, gelatinase upregulation was proportional to the amount of ligand present until saturation was reached. For any group of fresh tendon cells, MMP-2 and MMP-9 upregulation was greater in a three dimensional collagen gel than the highest response from the same group under two dimensional culture conditions. Attachment of the cells to type I collagen increased the ratio of active to inactive MMP-2. Dexamethasone inhibited the upregulation of both MMP-2 and MMP-9. These results show that ECM proteins can influence both the production and the state of activation of these matrix metalloproteinases.<newchar><newabs>12206658<newchar>In order to study how adipose conversion affects the extracellular environment, levels of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins during differentiation were analyzed by 125I-labeled antibody binding to each specific primary antibody. When confluent bovine intramuscular preadipocytes (BIP) were stimulated with adipogenic medium, there was a significant accretion on the cell surface of type I-VI collagens, laminin and fibronectin, compared with undifferentiated cells. The deposition amount of ECM proteins had reached near maximal levels at an early stage of differentiation and lasted throughout the culture. However, the increasing manners were not all the same in these eight proteins. Type V and type VI collagen tended to show a transient decline after the rapid rise at the beginning of stimulation, and fibronectin instead, subsequently decreased. Further analysis by immunocytochemical staining showed that remodeling occurred in type V and VI collagen matrices during this period; extensive fibrillar networks seen at 10 d after stimulation were quite unlike that formed earlier. These specific increases and development of matrix during adipocyte differentiation imply some significance for organizing fat lobules in each ECM proteins, especially type V and VI collagens.<newchar><newabs>11814638<newchar>Considerable evidence now suggests an interrelationship among long-term potentiation (LTP), extracellular matrix (ECM) reconfiguration, synaptogenesis, and memory consolidation within the mammalian central nervous system. Extracellular matrix molecules provide the scaffolding necessary to permit synaptic remodeling and contribute to the regulation of ionic and nutritional homeostasis of surrounding cells. These molecules also facilitate cellular proliferation, movement, differentiation, and apoptosis. The present review initially focuses on characterizing the ECM and the roles of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), in the maintenance and degradation of the ECM. The induction and maintenance of LTP is described. Debate continues over whether LTP results in some form of synaptic strengthening and in turn promotes memory consolidation. Next, the contribution of CAMs and TIMPs to the facilitation of LTP and memory consolidation is discussed. Finally, possible roles for angiotensins, MMPs, and tissue plasminogen activators in the facilitation of LTP and memory consolidation are described. These enzymatic pathways appear to be very important to an understanding of dysfunctional memory diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, brain tumors, and infections.<newchar><newabs>11781354<newchar>Metabolic acidosis causes a reversal of polarity of HCO(3)(-) flux in the cortical collecting duct (CCD). In CCDs incubated in vitro in acid media, beta-intercalated (HCO(3)(-)-secreting) cells are remodeled to functionally resemble alpha-intercalated (H(+)-secreting) cells. A similar remodeling of beta-intercalated cells, in which the polarity of H(+) pumps and Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchangers is reversed, occurs in cell culture and requires the deposition of polymerized hensin in the ECM. CCDs maintained 3 h at low pH ex vivo display a reversal of HCO(3)(-) flux that is quantitatively similar to an effect previously observed in acid-treated rabbits in vivo. We followed intracellular pH in the same beta-intercalated cells before and after acid incubation and found that apical Cl/HCO(3) exchange was abolished following acid incubation. Some cells also developed basolateral Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange, indicating a reversal of intercalated cell polarity. This adaptation required intact microtubules and microfilaments, as well as new protein synthesis, and was associated with decreased size of the apical surface of beta-intercalated cells. Addition of anti-hensin antibodies prevented the acid-induced changes in apical and basolateral Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange observed in the same cells and the corresponding suppression of HCO(3)(-) secretion. Acid loading also promoted hensin deposition in the ECM underneath adapting beta-intercalated cells. Hence, the adaptive conversion of beta-intercalated cells to alpha-intercalated cells during acid incubation depends upon ECM-associated hensin.<newchar><newabs>11522618<newchar>Vasculogenic mimicry describes a process where aggressive tumor cells in three-dimensional matrices mimic embryonic vasculogenesis by forming extracellular matrix (ECM)-rich, patterned tubular networks. Microarray gene chip analyses revealed significant increases in the expression of laminin 5 (Ln-5, gamma2 chain) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-1, -2, -9, and MT1-MMP (MMP-14) in aggressive compared with poorly aggressive melanoma cells. These components colocalized with developing patterned networks and antisense oligonucleotides to the Ln-5 gamma2 chain (but not sense oligonucleotides), and antibodies to MMP-2 or MT1-MMP (but not MMP-9) inhibited the formation of these networks. Cultures which did not receive antibodies to either MMPs-2 or -14 contained the Ln-5 gamma2 chain promigratory cleavage fragments. Poorly aggressive melanoma cells seeded on collagen I matrices preconditioned by the aggressive cells formed tubular networks along the Ln-5 gamma2 chain-enriched tracks deposited by the aggressive cells. These results suggest that increased expression of MMP-2 and MT1-MMP, along with matrix deposition of the Ln-5 gamma2 chain and/or its cleavage fragments, are required for vasculogenic mimicry by aggressive melanoma cells. Furthermore, the apparent recapitulation of laminin-rich, patterned networks observed in aggressive melanoma patients' tissue sections by aggressive melanoma tumor cells in three-dimensional culture may also serve as a model to help identify specific molecular targets which could function as templates for the coordinated migration of aggressive tumor cells and their proteolytic remodeling of the ECM and may have profound implications for the development of novel therapies directed at the ECM to alter tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>11431682<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is critical to morphogenesis and homeostasis. The identification of inactivating mutations in a gene encoding one of its modifying enzymes, matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2), in people with a hereditary disorder in which the bones disintegrate, represents the first genetic evidence that the proteolysis of the ECM mediates human growth and development. It also underscores the need for an intricate balance between breakdown and deposition of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>11413050<newchar>In the last decade, numerous studies have emphasized the important functions that matricellular proteins subserve during angiogenesis, wound healing, and the maintenance of organ and tissue integrity. Matricellular proteins are defined as a group of secreted regulatory macromolecules that are not structural components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) but rather mediate interactions between the ECM and cells. One of these matricellular proteins, termed SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine), is produced during the process of wound healing and is prominent in several types of injury. An excessive deposition of glomerular matrix and an elevated proliferation of certain glomerular cells characterize a variety of kidney diseases. The proliferation of these cells is associated typically with the remodeling process that occurs after kidney injury, and is, at least in part, modulated by the altered expression of ECM, various growth factors, and the elevated production of matricellular proteins (e.g., SPARC). The secretion of one or more of the matricellular proteins can lead to expansion of the glomerular basement membrane, infiltration of immunocompetent cells, and, in some cases, to a reversal of the pathological condition. However, these proteins can also contribute collectively to renal fibrosis, glomerulosclerosis, glomerulonephritis, and the eventual loss of renal function. The purpose of this review is to evaluate the multiple functions of SPARC in the kidney glomerulus under normal and pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>11178980<newchar>Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is a cytokine with many regulatory functions. In particular, IL-10 exerts neutralizing effect on other cytokines, and therefore IL-10 is thought to have important therapeutic implications. Recent reports suggest that IL-10 regulates not only immunocytes but also collagen and collagenase gene expression in fibroblasts. In this study, we investigated the effect of IL-10 on gene expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as type I collagen, fibronectin, and decorin, in human skin fibroblasts. Results of Northern blot analysis showed that both collagen I and fibronectin mRNAs were downregulated, while decorin gene expression was enhanced by IL-10 (10 ng/ml) time-dependently (6-24 h). alpha1(I) collagen and fibronectin mRNAs were decreased to one-third and one-fourth, respectively, by 50 ng/ml IL-10, whereas decorin mRNA was increased up to 2.7-fold by 50 ng/ml IL-10. Response to IL-10 by scleroderma fibroblasts was similar to that in normal dermal fibroblasts, with decreased expression levels of collagen and fibronectin and induced decorin mRNA levels. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a crucial fibrogenic cytokine which upregulates the mRNA expression of collagen and fibronectin, whereas it downregulates decorin mRNA expression in fibroblasts. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) has recently been shown to upregulate the type I collagen mRNA expression in cultured fibroblasts. We therefore examined whether IL-10 alters gene expression of ECM elicited by TGF-beta and MCP-1. Our results demonstrated that IL-10 downregulated the TGF-beta-elicited increase of mRNA expression of type I collagen and fibronectin, while partially recovering TGF-beta-elicited decrease of decorin expression in normal skin fibroblasts. By contrast, IL-10 did not alter the MCP-1-elicited upregulation of mRNA expression of either alpha1(I) collagen and decorin. Our data indicate that IL-10 differentially regulates TGF-beta and MCP-1 in the modulation of ECM proteins and therefore suggest that IL-10 plays a role in the regulation of tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>10958798<newchar>Cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by both remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and hypertrophic growth of the cardiocytes. Here we show increased expression and cytoskeletal association of the ECM proteins fibronectin and vitronectin in pressure-overloaded feline myocardium. These changes are accompanied by cytoskeletal binding and phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) at Tyr-397 and Tyr-925, c-Src at Tyr-416, recruitment of the adapter proteins p130(Cas), Shc, and Nck, and activation of the extracellular-regulated kinases ERK1/2. A synthetic peptide containing the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif of fibronectin and vitronectin was used to stimulate adult feline cardiomyocytes cultured on laminin or within a type-I collagen matrix. Whereas cardiocytes under both conditions showed RGD-stimulated ERK1/2 activation, only collagen-embedded cells exhibited cytoskeletal assembly of FAK, c-Src, Nck, and Shc. In RGD-stimulated collagen-embedded cells, FAK was phosphorylated only at Tyr-397 and c-Src association occurred without Tyr-416 phosphorylation and p130(Cas) association. Therefore, c-Src activation is not required for its cytoskeletal binding but may be important for additional phosphorylation of FAK. Overall, our study suggests that multiple signaling pathways originate in pressure-overloaded heart following integrin engagement with ECM proteins, including focal complex formation and ERK1/2 activation, and many of these pathways can be activated in cardiomyocytes via RGD-stimulated integrin activation.<newchar>NASA Discipline Cardiopulmonary<n-term>Non-NASA Center<n-term><newabs>23678518<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). There are four members of endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMP1-4), which regulate the activity of MMPs and lead to the inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis (9, 10). CGS25966 is a broad-spectrum, small-molecule inhibitor of MMPs (11). Faust et al. (11) inserted a polyethylene glycol (PEG) linker with an amino functional group for conjugation with the near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence dye Cy5.5 to form Cy5.5-PEG-CGS25966 (CY5.5-AF489). Waschkau et al. (12) evaluated Cy5.5-AF489 for use with in vivo NIR fluorescence imaging of tumors with high or low MMP-2/MMP-9 expression in nude mice.<newchar><newabs>11212844<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM) and are considered to be important in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Structural changes in the extracellular matrix are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and neoplastic invasion. Expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was investigated in human childhood medulloblastomas (MEDs)/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated immunohistochemical antigen detection technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed tissue that reacted positively and (b) a measure of immunoreactivity or staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D (negative)]. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in MEDs/PNETs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity was identified for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells with the staining intensity being also the strongest possible (A,B). These two forms of stromelysin (SL), types 1 (MMP-3) and 2 (MMP-10), share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Focal (surrounding less than 10% of the neoplastically transformed cells) but strong (A,B) immunoreactivity was determined for collagenase-3 (MMP-13), an endopeptidase characterized by a potent degrading activity against a wide spectrum of substrates. Weak (surrounding anywhere between 10% and 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells, and of B and B,C intensity) expression of MMP-2 (gelatinase A) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B), two cytokine-induced MMPs, was also observed. It is clear that the activation of MMPs and their inhibitors occurs in a very well orchestrated manner. The necessity of these same enzymes for the extravasation and infiltration of lymphocytes into regions of chronic local inflammation, as associated with neoplastically transformed masses of cells, may aid the transformed cells which have already acquired a more aggressive, metastatic immunophenotype (IP) to enter the peripheral circulation. Further characterization of the expression and utilization of MMPs and their inhibitors in the progression of solid human malignancies should lead to the development of novel anti-cancer therapies.<newchar><newabs>21698849<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Gadolinium (Gd), a lanthanide metal ion with seven unpaired electrons, has been shown to be very effective in enhancing proton relaxation because of its high magnetic moment and water coordination (8, 9). Gd-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) was the first intravenous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent used clinically, and a number of similar Gd chelates have been developed in an effort to further improve clinical use. However, these low molecular weight Gd chelates have short blood and tissue retention times, which limit their use as imaging agents in the vasculature and in cancerous tissues. Various macromolecular Gd complexes have demonstrated superior contrast enhancement for MRI of the vasculature and carcinomas (10-12); however, these Gd complexes cannot proceed into further clinical development because of high tissue accumulation and slow excretion of toxic Gd ions. Furthermore, they are largely nonspecific. Mouse 24p3 protein is a member of the lipocalin family of proteins (13). The protein is considered a homolog of human neutrophil gelatinase MMP-9–associated lipocalin-2 (NGAL), a multifunctional protein identified originally by Kjeldsen et al. (14). NGAL/24p3 protein is also released by macrophages, prolonging the activity of MMPs and destabilizing atherosclerotic plaques (15). In this chapter, a rat anti-mouse 24p3 monoclonal antibody (MAB1857) was incorporated into di-stearoyl-polyethylene glycol-phosphatidylethanolamine 2000 (DSPE-PEG2000) micelles labeled with Gd for use in MRI of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques (16, 17).<newchar><newabs>22934318<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a serine protease (8, 9). The uPA/uPA receptor (uPAR) system is responsible for tissue degradation after plasminogen activation to plasmin, which leads to a cascade of proteolysis or thrombolysis, depending on the physiological conditions. uPA also directly activates MMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and human growth factor (10). Malignant tumors often express high levels of uPA and uPAR (11); therefore, the uPA/uPAR system is linked to vascular diseases and cancer. The synthetic peptide Asp-cyclohexylalanine-Phe-d-Ser-d-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Trp-Ser (AE105) has been identified to have a high affinity for human uPAR (dissociation constant (Kd) = 0.4 nM) (12), and AE105 has been labeled with (64)Cu (T1/2 = 12.7 h, β(+) = 17.8%) as (64)Cu-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N',N'',N'''-tetraacetic acid-AE105 ((64)Cu-DOTA-AE105) and (64)Cu-DOTA-AE105-NH2 for use in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of uPAR expression in tumors (13, 14). Persson et al. (15) also prepared (68)Ga-1,4,7-triazacyclononane,1-glutaric acid-4,7-acetic acid-AE105-NH2 ((68)Ga-NODAGA-AE105-NH2) and (68)Ga-DOTA-AE105-NH2 for evaluation as alternative PET agents ((68)Ga: T1/2 = 68 min, β(+) = 89%).<newchar><newabs>22649803<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). There are four members of endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which regulate the activity of MMPs leading to inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis (9, 10). TIMP-2 (TIMP2) is a bifunctional inhibitor of angiogenesis by inhibition of proteinase activity of MMPs and endothelial cell proliferation via binding to α3β1 (the N-terminal domain) and by MMP-independent anti-angiogenic activity (the C-terminal domain) (11, 12). Kang et al. (13) fused the N-terminal domain of TIMP2 to the C-terminus of human serum albumin (HSA) to form HSA/TIMP2 fusion protein (HSA-TIMP2), which is readily secreted by the transfected yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. HSA-TIMP2 retains its anti-angiogenic activity at the C-terminal domain with little MMP inhibitory activity at the N-terminal domain. Lee et al. (14) have evaluated Cy5.5-HSA/TIMP2 (Cy5.5-HSA-TIMP2) for in vivo near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging of rat prostate MLL tumors in nude mice showing maximum tumor accumulation at 2 d after injection. Integrins are a family of heterodimeric glycoproteins on cell surfaces that mediate diverse biological events involving cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions (15). Integrins consist of an α and a β subunit and are important for cell adhesion and signal transduction. The αvβ3 integrin is the most prominent receptor affecting tumor growth, tumor invasiveness, metastasis, tumor-induced angiogenesis, inflammation, osteoporosis, and rheumatoid arthritis (16-21). Expression of the αvβ3 integrin is strong on tumor cells and activated endothelial cells, whereas expression is weak on resting endothelial cells and most normal tissues. The peptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) has been identified as a recognition motif used by extracellular matrix proteins (vitronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, and collagen) to bind to a variety of integrins, including αvβ3. The αvβ3 antagonists are being studied as anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic agents (18, 22, 23). Various radiolabeled RGD peptides (antagonists) have been introduced for imaging of tumors and tumor angiogenesis (24). Choi et al. (25) conjugated multiple c(RGDfK) peptides to HSA-TIMP2 to enhance the binding capacity of the protein (RGD-HSA-TIMP2) to tumors and their vasculatures. (123)I-RGD-HSA-TIMP2 and (123)I-HSA-TIMP2 have been studied as potential single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) probes for imaging αvβ3 receptors in nude mice bearing human glioblastoma U87MG tumors.<newchar><newabs>20641830<newchar>Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to understand biological functions of specific targets (1, 2). However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when fluorophores that absorb visible light (350–700 nm) are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700–1,000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have a wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (3). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (4). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (5). Hepsin is a type II transmembrane serine protease that is generally not detectable in normal and benign hypertrophic prostate glands. Hepsin is also expressed in the liver, kidney, and thyroid (6). Elevated levels of hepsin have been found in prostate tumors (7). Hepsin promotes prostate cancer progression and metastasis (8). The peptide IPLVVPL was found to bind selectively to hepsin from phage library screening. Kelly et al. (9) used this sequence with linking residues GGSCK(Fitc) with Cy5.5-cross-linked iron oxide nanoparticles (Cy5.5-CLIO) to attach to the IPLVVPL to form fluorescence nanoparticles, IPLVVPLGGSC(Cy5.5-CLIO)K(Fitc). Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). IPLVVPLGGSC(Cy5.5-CLIO)K(Fitc) is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of hepsin expression in prostate cancer.<newchar><newabs>12413890<newchar>Skin extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules regulate a variety of cellular activities, including cell movement, which are central to wound healing and metastasis. Regulated cell movement is modulated by proteases and their associated molecules, including the serine proteases urinary-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) and their inhibitors (PAIs). As a result of wounding and loss of basement membrane structure, epidermal keratinocytes can become exposed to collagen. To test the hypothesis that during wounding, exposed collagen, the most abundant ECM molecule in the skin, regulates keratinocyte PA and PAI gene expression, we utilized an in vitro model in which activated keratinocytes were cultured in dishes coated with collagen or other ECM substrates. tPA, uPA, and PAI-1 mRNA and enzymatic activity were detected when activated keratinocytes attached to fibronectin, vitronectin, collagen IV, and RGD peptide. In contrast, adhesion to collagen I and collagen III completely suppressed expression of PAI-1 mRNA and protein and further increased tPA expression and activity. Similarly, keratinocyte adhesion to laminin-1 suppressed PAI-1 mRNA and protein expression and increased tPA activity. The suppressive effect of collagen I on PAI-1 gene induction was dependent on the maintenance of its native fibrillar structure. Thus, it would appear that collagen- and laminin-regulated gene expression of molecules associated with plasminogen activation provides an additional dimension in the regulation of cell movement and matrix remodeling in skin wound healing.<newchar><newabs>11128027<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a fundamental role in the regulation of normal and pathological processes. The most abundantly expressed component found in the ECM is collagen. Triple helical collagen is known to be highly resistant to proteolytic cleavage except by members of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of enzymes. To date little is known concerning the biochemical consequences of collagen metabolism on human diseases. This is due in part to the lack of specific reagents that can distinguish between proteolyzed and triple helical forms of collagen. Here we used the technique of Subtractive Immunization (SI) to generate two unique monoclonal antibodies (MAbs HUIV26 and HUI77) that react with denatured and proteolyzed forms of collagen, but show little if any reaction with triple helical collagen. Importantly, HUIV26 and HUI77 react with cryptic sites within the ECM of human melanoma tumors, demonstrating their utility for immunohistochemical analysis in vivo. Thus, the generation of these novel MAbs not only identify specific cryptic epitopes within triple helical collagen, but also provide important new reagents for studying the roles of collagen remodeling in normal as well as pathological processes.<newchar><newabs>20641626<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans surrounding connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM components, which provide a matrix environment for their permeation through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which degrade the basement membrane and ECM (3). Gelatinase family is a subgroup of MMPs consisting of gelatinase A (MMP-2) and B (MMP-9) (4). Gelatinase expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated level of gelatinases has been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis in cancer patients (5). A cyclic decapeptide, cCTTHWGFTLC (CTT), was found to be a potent and selective inhibitor of MMP-2 and MMP-9 (6). The HWGF motif is important for the inhibitory activity. Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid was conjugated to an amino group of the N-terminal cysteine of the CTT peptide for radiolabeling with (111)In. (111)In-DTPA-CTT is being developed for single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging of gelatinase activity in metastatic tumors.<newchar><newabs>20641828<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, inflammation, myocardial infraction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-8). The gelatinase family is a subgroup of MMPs consisting of gelatinase A (MMP-2) and gelatinase B (MMP-9) (9). Gelatinase expression in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages, is highly regulated. Elevated levels of gelatinases have been found in tumors that are associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (10). A number of synthetic MMP inhibitors have been developed to block the activated MMPs in pathological conditions (11). (R)-2-(N-Benzyl-4-(2-fluoroethoxy)phenylsulfonamido)-N-hydroxy-3-methylbutanamide (1f) was found to be a potent MMP inhibitor (12). (18)F-Labeled 1f ([(18)F]1f) is being developed for PET imaging of MMP proteolytic activity in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases.<newchar><newabs>20641554<newchar>Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) maps information about tissues spatially and functionally. Protons (hydrogen nuclei) are widely used in imaging because of their abundance in water molecules. Water comprises ~80% of most soft tissue. The contrast of proton MRI depends primarily on the density of the nucleus (proton spins), the relaxation times of the nuclear magnetization (T1, longitudinal, and T2, transverse), the magnetic environment of the tissues, and the blood flow to the tissues. However, insufficient contrast between normal and diseased tissues requires the development of contrast agents. Most contrast agents affect the T1 and T2 relaxation times of the surrounding nuclei, mainly the protons of water. T2* is the spin–spin relaxation time composed of variations from molecular interactions and intrinsic magnetic heterogeneities of tissues in the magnetic field [1]. Cross-linked iron oxide (CLIO) nanoparticles and other iron oxide formulations affect T2 primarily and lead to decreased signals. On the other hand, the paramagnetic T1 agents, such as gadolinium (Gd(3+)), and manganese (Mn(2+)), accelerate T1 relaxation and lead to brighter contrast images. Optical fluorescence imaging is increasingly used to obtain biological functions of specific targets [2, 3] in small animals. However, the intrinsic fluorescence of biomolecules poses a problem when visible light (350-700 nm) absorbing fluorophores are used. Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence (700-1000 nm) detection avoids the background fluorescence interference of natural biomolecules, providing a high contrast between target and background tissues. NIR fluorophores have wider dynamic range and minimal background as a result of reduced scattering compared with visible fluorescence detection. They also have high sensitivity, resulting from low infrared background, and high extinction coefficients, which provide high quantum yields. The NIR region is also compatible with solid-state optical components, such as diode lasers and silicon detectors. NIR fluorescence imaging is becoming a non-invasive alternative to radionuclide imaging in small animals. Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts [4]. Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue [5]. Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM [6]. Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis [7-10]. Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a serine protease [11, 12]. The uPA and uPA receptor (uPAR) system is responsible for tissue degradation after plasminogen activation to plasmin, which leads to a cascade of proteolysis or thrombolysis depending on the physiological conditions. uPA also directly activates MMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and human growth factor [13]. Malignant tumors and tumor-associated stromal cells (macrophages, endothelial cells and fibroblasts) often express high levels of uPA and uPAR [14]; therefore, the uPA/uPAR system is linked to vascular diseases and cancer. The amino-terminal fragment (ATF, 1-135 amino acids) of uPA binds with high affinity to uPAR [15]. Yang et al. [16] have developed a multimodality imaging probe by conjugation of Cy5.5-ATF to iron oxide nanoparticles to form Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles for NIR imaging and MRI of uPAR expression in tumor. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with absorbance maximum at 675 nm and emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1).<newchar><newabs>20641694<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a serine protease (8, 9). The uPA and uPA receptor (uPAR) system is responsible for tissue degradation after plasminogen activation to plasmin, which leads to a cascade of proteolysis or thrombolysis depending on the physiological conditions. uPA also directly activates MMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and human growth factor (10). Malignant tumors often express high levels of uPA and uPAR (11); therefore, the uPA/uPAR system is linked to vascular diseases and cancer. A synthetic peptide, Asp-cyclohexylalanine-Phe-D-Ser-D-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Trp-Ser (AE105), has been identified to have high affinity (dissociation constant (Kd) = 0.4 nM) for human uPAR (12), and it has been labeled with (64)Cu as (64)Cu-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N',N'',N'''-tetraacetic acid-AE105 ((64)Cu-DOTA-AE105) for use in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of uPAR expression in tumors (13).<newchar><newabs>22675741<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (4-7). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (8). There are four members of endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which regulate the activity of MMPs leading to inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis (9, 10). TIMP-2 (TIMP2) is a bifunctional inhibitor of angiogenesis that inhibits the proteinase activity of MMPs and endothelial cell proliferation via binding to α3β1 (the N-terminal domain) and MMP-independent anti-angiogenic activity (the C-terminal domain) (11, 12). Kang et al. (13) fused the N-terminal domain of TIMP2 to the C-terminus of human serum albumin (HSA) to form HSA/TIMP-2 (HSA-TIMP2) fusion protein, which is readily secreted by the transfected yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. HSA/TIMP2 retains its anti-angiogenic activity at the C-terminal domain with little MMP inhibitory activity at the N-terminal domain. Lee et al. (14) evaluated Cy5.5-HSA/TIMP-2 (Cy5.5-HSA-TIMP2) for in vivo near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging of rat prostate MLL tumors in nude mice, which showed maximum tumor accumulation at 2 d after injection.<newchar><newabs>22238802<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Gold has not been used as an X-ray contrast agent in vivo. Gold has a higher atomic number and a higher absorption coefficient than iodine, providing 2.7-fold greater contrast/weight than iodine (4). Furthermore, imaging gold at 80–100 keV reduces interference from bone absorption and provides lower soft tissue absorption, which would reduce radiation to patients. Hainfeld et al. (4) used gold nanoparticles (AuNPs; 1.9 nm in diameter, ~50 kDa) as a computed tomography (CT) contrast agent in mice; these experiments showed enhanced CT contrast of the vasculature, kidneys, and tumors in mice. However, plasma proteins in blood adsorb onto the surface of bare AuNPs, which produces large aggregates (5) that may result in altered pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of AuNPs (6). Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is found to minimize nonspecific adsorption of proteins onto NPs and to reduce their uptake by the liver (6). PEG-AuNPs have been being studied as cancer CT imaging and photothermal agents (7). Several families of MMPs are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastases (8-11). MMP expression is highly regulated in normal cells, such as trophoblasts, osteoclasts, neutrophils, and macrophages. Elevated levels of MMPs have been found in tumors associated with a poor prognosis for cancer patients (12). The peptide Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-NH2 was found to be a MMP substrate and is cleaved between the Leu and Gly residues. Lee et al. (13) used this sequence with a Cy5.5 NIR dye molecule to attach to AuNPs to form fluorescence-quenched nanoparticles (Cy5.5-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-Cys-AuNPs (Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs or GANPs). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, resulting in fluorescence quenching because of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer to Au. NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Leu-Gly bond is cleaved by MMPs, releasing Cy5.5-containing fragments. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm, an emission maximum at 694 nm, and a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M−(1)cm−(1). Cy5.5-MMP-AuNPs are being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of MMPs expressed in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases. Xie et al. (14) replaced the AuNP with Au-Fe3O4, a composite NP shaped like a flower, to induce a fluorescently quenched state to the overall nanostructure. There were three iron oxide “petals” on each AuNP. The MMP peptide was covalently linked to an anchoring unit, Lys-tridihydrophenylalanine (Lys-TDOPA) on the surface of the iron oxide NP. The gold surface was passivated with a thiolated PEG (SH-PEG5000). Cy5.5-Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Val-Arg-Gly-(Lys-TDOPA)3-flower-like gold–Fe3O4 optical NPs (FANPs) have been evaluated for imaging protease expression in vivo.<newchar><newabs>19185493<newchar>A key feature of angiogenesis is directional control of endothelial cell (EC) morphogenesis and movement [1]. During angiogenic sprouting, endothelial &quot;tip cells&quot; directionally branch from existing vessels in response to biochemical cues such as VEGF or hypoxia and migrate and invade the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) in a process that requires ECM remodeling by matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) [2-4]. Tip EC branching is mediated by directional protrusion of subcellular pseudopodial branches [5, 6]. Here, we seek to understand how EC pseudopodial branching is locally regulated to directionally guide angiogenesis. We develop an in vitro 3D EC model system in which migrating ECs display branched pseudopodia morphodynamics similar to those in living zebrafish. Using this system, we find that ECM stiffness and ROCK-mediated myosin II activity inhibit EC pseudopodial branch initiation. Myosin II is dynamically localized to the EC cortex and is partially released under conditions that promote branching. Local depletion of cortical myosin II precedes branch initiation, and initiation can be induced by local inhibition of myosin II activity. Thus, local downregulation of myosin II cortical contraction allows pseudopodium initiation to mediate EC branching and hence guide directional migration and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>20641276<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a serine protease (8, 9). The uPA and uPA receptor (uPAR) system is responsible for tissue degradation after plasminogen activation to plasmin, which leads to a cascade of proteolysis or thrombolysis depending on the physiological conditions. uPA also directly activates MMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and human growth factor (10). Malignant tumors often express high levels of uPA and uPAR (11); therefore, the uPA/uPAR system is linked to vascular diseases and cancer. A synthetic, protected-graft copolymer (PGC), consisting of poly-L-lysine (PL) with multiple methoxy polyethylene glycol (MPEG) side chains, has been used as a drug carrier with efficient accumulation in tumors (12, 13). The peptide GGSGRSANAKC was found to be an uPA substrate that is cleaved between the Arg (R) and Ser (S) residues. Law et al. (14) used this sequence to attach a Cy5.5 near-infrared (NIR) dye molecule to the unmodified PL side chains of PGC to form Cy5.5-GGSGRSANAK(Fitc)C-PL-MPEG (Cy5.5-uPA-PGC), a fluorescence-quenched polymer. Cy5.5 is a NIR fluorescent dye with an absorbance maximum at 675 nm and an emission maximum at 694 nm with a high extinction coefficient of 250,000 M(-1)cm(-1). The Cy5.5 molecules are in close proximity, which causes fluorescence quenching as a result of efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer. The NIR fluorescence signal will increase when the Arg-Ser bond is cleaved by uPA, releasing fragments containing Cy5.5. Cy5.5-uPA-PGC is being developed for NIR fluorescence imaging of uPA proteolytic activity in tumors, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and other diseases (15).<newchar><newabs>19400409<newchar>Uterine leiomyoma is a fibrotic disease that contains abundant extracellular matrix (ECM) components, particularly collagen fibrils. Aberrant ECM metabolism has been thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of uterine leiomyomas. However, it remains poorly understood whether ovarian sex steroid hormones modulate collagen metabolism in uterine leiomyomas. More recently, a few articles have demonstrated the differential effects of ovarian sex steroids, selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), and selective progesterone receptor modulators (SPRMs) on the induction of the ECM-remodeling enzymes and collagen synthesis in uterine leiomyoma cells. Sex steroids may act to up-regulate collagen synthesis, whereas SERMs and SPRMs down-regulate collagen synthesis. Further study will be needed to clarify the precise mechanism underlying steroidal regulation of collagen synthesis in uterine leiomyomas.<newchar><newabs>17226774<newchar>Fibrin serves as a provisional extracellular matrix (ECM) for arterial smooth muscle cells (ASMC) after vascular injury, yet little is known about the effect of fibrin on ECM remodeling by these cells. To address this question, monkey ASMC were grown on fibrin gels and tissue culture (TC) plastic, and proteoglycan synthesis and accumulation were assessed by radiolabeling. Initial rates of (35)S-sulfate incorporation into proteoglycans were identical for both groups, but increased proteoglycan accumulation was observed in cultures grown for 48 h on fibrin. This increased accumulation on fibrin was due to reduced proteoglycan turnover and retention within the fibrin gel. Decorin and biglycan constituted 40 and 14% of the total proteoglycan in the fibrin gels, whereas their combined contribution was only 12% in control matrices. To explore whether the retention of decorin in fibrin had any influence on the properties of the fibrin gel, ASMC-mediated fibrin contraction assays were performed. Both de novo synthesis of decorin as well as decorin added during polymerization inhibited the ability of the cells to contract fibrin. In contrast, decorin added exogenously to mature fibrin matrices had no effect on fibrin gel contraction. This study illustrates that decorin derived from ASMC selectively accumulates in fibrin and modifies fibrin architecture and mechanical properties. Such an accumulation may influence wound healing and the thrombotic properties of this provisional pro-atherosclerotic ECM.<newchar><newabs>20641652<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degrading the basement membrane and ECM (3). Tumor angiogenesis represents a continuous and important process in tumor development in which the tumor attempts to gain an independent blood supply (4). This process is driven by the tumor's overproduction of angiogenic factors, which bind to receptors on nearby vessel endothelial cells. Angiogenesis is essential for the growth of solid tumors and their metastases. Imaging angiogenesis may be useful for monitoring angiogenic treatments of tumors and cardiovascular diseases (5-7). Aminopeptidase N (APN, CD13) is a membrane bound glycoprotein with MMP activity that cleaves unsubstituted, N-terminal amino acids with neutral side chains from peptides (8). APN has been shown to play a role in tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (9). In addition to endothelial cells of angiogenic vessels, most cells of myeloid origin, epithelial cells, fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells also express CD13 (10, 11). The tumor homing peptide cyclo(Cys-Asn-Gly-Arg-Cys)-Gly-Lys (cNGR) contains the Asn-Gly-Arg (NGR) motif that binds to APN (12). Gadolinium (Gd(3+)), a lanthanide metal paramagnetic ion with seven unpaired electrons, has been shown to be very effective in enhancing proton relaxation because of its high magnetic moment and water coordination, which lead to brighter contrast images (13, 14). Fluorescent semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are nanocrystals made of CdSe/CdTe-ZnS with a radius of 1–10 nm (15-17). They can be tuned to emit in a range of wavelengths by changing their sizes and composition, thus providing broad excitation profiles and high absorption coefficients. Oostendorp et al. (18) prepared multimodal cNGR-labeled paramagnetic QDs (cNGR-pQDs) for measurement of tumor angiogenic activity with magnetic resonance imaging.<newchar><newabs>16977344<newchar>Collagen types I, II, and III are the most abundant extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Collagenase is a member of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of enzymes, and is the principal enzyme involved with collagen degradation. Cellular-ECM interactions are vitally important to tissue structure and function. In this review, we summarize recent work that highlights the role of collagenase in ECM remodeling and repair, and further report that alterations of collagenase expression, function, and/or regulation are found in many diverse disease states, including aortic aneurysms, tumor invasiveness and their metastases, and hernias. Collagenase is intimately involved in many surgical diseases, and represents a potential target for therapy.<newchar><newabs>17910028<newchar>Osteopontin (OPN) plays roles in a variety of cellular processes from bone resorption and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling to immune cell activation and inhibition of apoptosis. Because it binds receptors (integrins, CD44 variants) typically engaged by ECM molecules, OPN acts as a &quot;soluble&quot; ECM molecule. A persistent theme throughout the characterization of how OPN functions has been the importance of phosphorylation. The source of the OPN used in specific experiments and the location of modified sites is an increasingly important consideration for OPN research. We review briefly some of the ways OPN impacts on the biology of mammalian systems with an emphasis on the importance of serine phosphorylation in modulating its signaling ability. We describe experiments that support the hypothesis that differences in the post-translational phosphorylation of OPN expressed by different cell types regulate how it impacts on target cells. Analyses of OPN's potential secondary structure reveal a possible beta-sheet conformation that offers an interpretation of certain experimental observations, specifically the effect of thrombin cleavage; it is consistent with an interaction between the C-terminal region of the protein and the central integrin-binding RGD sequence.<newchar><newabs>17589920<newchar>Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), a prototype of multifunctional cytokine, is a key regulator of extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly and remodeling. Specifically, TGF-beta isoforms have the ability to induce the expression of ECM proteins in mesenchymal cells, and to stimulate the production of protease inhibitors that prevent enzymatic breakdown of the ECM. Elevated TGF-beta expression in affected organs, and subsequent deregulation of TGF-beta functions, correlates with the abnormal connective tissue deposition observed during the onset of fibrotic diseases. During the last few years, tremendous progress has been made in the understanding of the molecular aspects of intracellular signaling downstream of the TGF-beta receptors. In particular, Smad proteins, TGF-beta receptor kinase substrates that translocate into the cell nucleus to act as transcription factors, have been studied extensively. The role of Smad3 in the transcriptional regulation of type I collagen gene expression and in the development of fibrosis, demonstrated both in vitro and in animal models with a targeted deletion of Smad3, is of critical importance because it may lead to novel therapeutic strategies against these diseases. This review focuses on the mechanisms underlying Smad modulation of fibrillar collagen expression and how it relates to fibrotic processes.<newchar><newabs>16728327<newchar>In vertebrate embryos, development of an architecturally optimized blood vessel network allows the efficient transport of oxygen and nutrients to all other tissues. The final shape of the vascular system results from vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, during which motile endothelial cells (ECs) modify their integrin-mediated interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) in response to pro- and anti-angiogenic factors. There is mounting evidence that different members of the semaphorin (SEMA) family of neural guidance cues participate in developmental and postnatal vessel formation and patterning as well. It turns out that paracrine secretion of class 3 SEMA (SEMA3) by nonendothelial tissues cooperates with vascular endothelial growth factor in regulating EC precursor migration and assembly during vasculogenesis and funnels navigating blood vessel through tissue boundaries during sprouting angiogenesis. Autocrine loops of endothelial SEMA3 instead appears to regulate vascular remodeling, which occurs through blood vessel intussusception and fusion. SEMA3 activity both on the vascular and nervous systems relies upon their ability to hamper the affinity of integrin receptors towards ECM ligands. Indeed, signaling from SEMA-activated plexin receptors negatively regulates cell-ECM adhesive interactions by inhibiting two key integrin activators, such as the small GTPase R-Ras and the focal adhesion protein talin.<newchar><newabs>20641488<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play an important role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Invasive tumor cells adhere to the ECM, which provides a matrix environment for permeation of tumor cells through the basal lamina and underlying interstitial stroma of the connective tissue. Overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteases by tumor cells allows intravasation of tumor cells into the circulatory system after degradation of the basement membrane and ECM (3). Several families of proteases are involved in atherogenesis, myocardial infarction, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion and metastasis (4-7). Gadolinium (Gd), a lanthanide metal ion with seven unpaired electrons, has been shown to be very effective in enhancing proton relaxation because of its high magnetic moment and water coordination (8, 9). Gd-Labeled diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA) was the first intravenous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent used clinically, and a number of similar Gd chelates have been developed in an effort to further improve clinical use. However, these low molecular weight Gd chelates have short blood and tissue retention times, which limit their use as imaging agents in the vasculature and cancer. Various macromolecular Gd complexes have demonstrated superior contrast enhancement for MRI of the vasculature and carcinomas (10-12); however, these Gd complexes cannot proceed into further clinical development because of high tissue accumulation and slow excretion of toxic Gd ions. Furthermore, they are largely nonspecific. Gly-Pro-D-Leu-D-Ala-NHOH was found to be a broad-spectrum inhibitor of MMP-1, -2, -3, -8, -9, and -13 (13). Gd-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N',N'',N''',N''''-tetraacetic acid (DOTA)-Gly-Pro-D-Leu-D-Ala-NHOH (P947) has been developed to detect MMP activities in atherosclerotic plaques.<newchar><newabs>19123976<newchar>Membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is a zinc-dependent proteinase found in cholesterol-rich lipid rafts on the plasma membrane. MT1-MMP hydrolyzes extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, activates pro-matrix metalloproteinase-2 (proMMP-2) and plays an important role in ECM remodeling, cancer cell migration and metastasis. The role of caveolin-1, an integral protein of caveolae, in the activation of MT1-MMP remains largely unknown. Here, we show that the expression of caveolin-1 attenuates the activation of proMMP-2, reduces proteolytic cleavage of ECM and inhibits cell migration. We utilized the cytoplasmic tail domain deletion (DeltaCT) or the E240A mutant of MT1-MMP. Co-expression of caveolin-1 with the wild-type or the DeltaCT MT1-MMP decreased the proMMP-2 activation and inhibited collagen degradation and cell migration. Caveolin-1 had no effect on the catalytically inert E240A MT1-MMP. Our findings suggest that caveolin-1 is essential in the down-regulation of MT1-MMP activity by promoting internalization from the cell surface.<newchar><newabs>18945811<newchar>White adipose tissue (WAT) in obese humans is characterized by macrophage accumulation the effects of which on WAT biology are not fully understood. We previously demonstrated that macrophage-secreted factors impair preadipocyte differentiation and induce inflammation, and we described the excessive fibrotic deposition in WAT from obese individuals. Microarray analysis revealed significant overexpression of extracellular matrix (ECM) genes in inflammatory preadipocytes. We show here an organized deposition of fibronectin, collagen I, and tenascin-C and clustering of the ECM receptor alpha5 integrin, characterizing inflammatory preadipocytes. Anti-alpha5 integrin-neutralizing antibody decreased proliferation of these cells, underlining the importance of the fibronectin/integrin partnership. Fibronectin-cultured preadipocytes exhibited increased proliferation and expression of both nuclear factor-kappaB and cyclin D1. Small interfering RNA deletion of nuclear factor-kappaB and cyclin D1 showed that these factors link preadipocyte proliferation with inflammation and ECM remodeling. Macrophage-secreted molecules increased preadipocyte migration through an increase in active/phosphorylated focal adhesion kinase. Gene expression and neutralizing antibody experiments suggest that inhibin beta A, a TGF-beta family member, is a major fibrotic factor. Interactions between preadipocytes and macrophages were favored in a three-dimensional collagen I matrix mimicking the fibrotic context of WAT. Cell-rich regions were immunostained for preadipocytes, proliferation, and macrophages in the vicinity of fibrotic WAT from obese individuals. In conclusion, an inflammatory environment leads to profound modifications of the human preadipocyte phenotype, producing fibrotic components with increased migration and proliferation. This phenomenon might play a role in facilitating the constitution of quiescent preadipocyte pools and eventually in the maintenance and aggravation of increased fat mass in obesity.<newchar><newabs>16037568<newchar>Cytokine and extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis are distinct systems that are each dysregulated in heart failure. Here we show that tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-3 is a critical regulator of both systems in a mouse model of left ventricular (LV) dilation and dysfunction. Timp-3(-/-) mice develop precipitous LV dilation and dysfunction reminiscent of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), culminating in early onset of heart failure by 6 weeks, compared with wild-type aortic-banding (AB). Timp-3 deficiency resulted in increased TNFalpha converting enzyme (TACE) activity within 6 hours after AB leading to enhanced tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) processing. In addition, TNFalpha production increased in timp-3(-/-)-AB myocardium. A significant elevation in gelatinase and collagenase activities was observed 1 week after AB, with localized ECM degradation in timp-3(-/-)-AB myocardium. Timp-3(-/-)/tnfalpha(-/-) mice were generated and subjected to AB for comparative analyses with timp-3(-/-)-AB mice. This revealed the critical role of TNFalpha in the early phase of LV remodeling, de novo expression of Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-8 in the absence of TNFalpha, and highlighted the importance of interstitial collagenases (MMP-2, MMP-13, and MT1-MMP) for cardiac ECM degradation. Ablation of TNFalpha, or limiting MMP activity with a synthetic MMP inhibitor (PD166793), each partially attenuated LV dilation and cardiac dysfunction in timp-3(-/-)-AB mice. Notably, combining TNFalpha ablation with MMP inhibition completely rescued heart disease in timp-3(-/-)-AB mice. This study provides a basis for anti-TNFalpha and MMP inhibitor combination therapy in heart disease.<newchar><newabs>16951131<newchar>Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is characterized by sustained vasoconstriction, with subsequent extracellular matrix (ECM) production and smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation. Changes in the ECM can modulate vasoreactivity and SMC contraction. Galectin-1 (Gal-1) is a hypoxia-inducible beta-galactoside-binding lectin produced by vascular, interstitial, epithelial, and immune cells. Gal-1 regulates SMC differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis via interactions with the ECM, as well as immune system function, and, therefore, likely plays a role in the pathogenesis of PH. We investigated the effects of Gal-1 during hypoxic PH by quantifying 1) Gal-1 expression in response to hypoxia in vitro and in vivo and 2) the effect of Gal-1 gene deletion on the magnitude of the PH response to chronic hypoxia in vivo. By constructing and screening a subtractive library, we found that acute hypoxia increases expression of Gal-1 mRNA in isolated pulmonary mesenchymal cells. In wild-type (WT) mice, Gal-1 immunoreactivity increased after 6 wk of hypoxia. Increased expression of Gal-1 protein was confirmed by quantitative Western analysis. Gal-1 knockout (Gal-1(-/-)) mice showed a decreased PH response, as measured by right ventricular pressure and the ratio of right ventricular to left ventricular + septum wet weight compared with their WT counterparts. However, the number and degree of muscularized vessels increased similarly in WT and Gal-1(-/-) mice. In response to chronic hypoxia, the decrease in factor 8-positive microvessel density was similar in both groups. Vasoreactivity of WT and Gal-1(-/-) mice was tested in vivo and with use of isolated perfused lungs exposed to acute hypoxia. Acute hypoxia caused a significant increase in RV pressure in wild-type and Gal-1(-/-) mice; however, the response of the Gal-1(-/-) mice was greater. These results suggest that Gal-1 influences the contractile response to hypoxia and subsequent remodeling during hypoxia-induced PH, which influences disease progression.<newchar><newabs>18332138<newchar>The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway has emerged as a major regulator of cellular functions and has been implicated in several pathologies involving remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). The end stage of inflammatory joint diseases is characterized by excessive ECM catabolism, and in this study we assess the role of PI3K signaling in the induction of collagenolytic matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in human chondrocytes. We used the most potent cytokine stimulus reported to promote cartilage ECM catabolism, namely interleukin-1 (IL-1) in combination with oncostatin M (OSM). Both OSM and IL-6 (in the presence of its soluble receptor), but not IL-1 nor leukemia inhibitory factor, induced Akt phosphorylation in human chondrocytes. Inhibition of PI3K signaling using LY294002 blocked IL-1+OSM-mediated Akt phosphorylation, induction of MMP-1 and MMP-13, and cartilage collagenolysis. To further explore the role of downstream substrates within the PI3K pathway, complementary use of small molecule inhibitors and specific small interfering RNAs demonstrated that the PI3K subunit p110alpha and Akt1 were required for MMP-1 mRNA induction. MMP-13 induction was also reduced by loss of function of these molecules and by a lack of p110delta, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 or Akt3. We therefore propose that the activities of specific elements of the PI3K signaling pathway, including Akt, are necessary for the synergistic induction of MMP-1 and MMP-13 and the cartilage breakdown stimulated by IL-1+OSM. Our data provide new insight into the mechanism of synergy between IL-1 and OSM and highlight new therapeutic targets for inflammatory joint diseases that aim to repress the expression of collagenases.<newchar><newabs>16060537<newchar>The actin and microtubule cytoskeleton have been found to contribute to the elastic modulus of cells, which may be modulated by adhesion to extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and subsequent alterations in the cytoskeleton. In this study, the apparent elastic modulus (Eapp) of osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cells adhered to fibronectin (FN), vitronectin (VN), type I collagen (COLI), fetal bovine serum (FBS), or poly-l-lysine (PLL), and bare glass were determined using an atomic force microscope (AFM). The E(app) of osteoblasts adhered to ECM proteins (FN, VN, COLI, and FBS) that bind cells via integrins were higher compared to cells on glass and PLL, which adhere cells through nonspecific binding. Also, osteoblasts adhered to FN, VN, COLI, and FBS had F-actin stress fiber formation, while osteoblasts on glass and PLL showed few F-actin fibers. Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton decreased E(app) of osteoblasts plated on FN to the level of osteoblasts plated on glass, while microtubule disruption had no significant effect. This suggests that the elevated modulus of osteoblasts adhered to FN was due to remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton upon adhesion to ECM proteins. Modulation of cell stiffness upon adhesion to various substrates may influence mechanosignal transduction in osteoblasts.<newchar><newabs>16754484<newchar>Our objective was to investigate the role of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) and their cellular sources in childhood asthma. We used 12 controls and 16 asthmatic children. The levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells of asthmatic children were measured immunocytochemically. The positive level index, defined as the percentage of positive-stained cells x average optical density, was used to assess the expressing levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1. The percentages of eosinophils and mast cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of asthmatic children were increased. Levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 in BAL cell of asthmatic children were increased significantly at about 30- and 35-fold relative to the controls, respectively. These results suggest that both MMP-9 and TIMP-1 contribute to tissue remodeling. MMP-9, which mediates the degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM), is increased significantly in the early or acute stage and may play a role in ECM degeneration. Excessive TIMP-1 may be synthesized following MMP-9 production when the body tries to repair the damage, which results in excessive deposition of ECM component.<newchar><newabs>14960172<newchar>Hepatic stellate cells (HSC) changed their morphology and function including production of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in response to extracellular matrix (ECM) component used as a substratum in culture. We examined in this study the regulatory role of ECM component on expression of MMPs and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) in rat HSCs cultured on polystyrene, type I collagen-coated surface, type I collagen gel, or Matrigel, respectively. When cultured on type I collagen gel, HSCs showed the asteroid cell shape and MMP-1 activity, as detected by in situ zymography. Expression of MMP-1 protein and mRNA were examined by using immunofluorescence staining and RT-PCR analysis in HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. Active form of MMP-2 was detected by gelatin zymography in the conditioned medium of HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel, whereas it was not detected when HSCs were cultured on polystyrene, type I collagen-coated surface, or Matrigel. Increased MMP-2 mRNA was detected by RT-PCR in HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. Increased MT1-MMP proteins were shown to localize on the cell membrane by using immunofluorescence staining in HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. Elevated expression of membrane-type matrix metallproteinase-1 (MT1-MMP) mRNA and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) mRNA was detected by RT-PCR in HSCs cultured on type I collagen-coated surface or type I collagen gel. These results indicate that expression of MMPs and TIMP-2 is regulated by ECM components in cultured HSCs, suggesting an important role of HSCs in the remodeling of liver tissue.<newchar><newabs>15625103<newchar>Transformation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts, characterized by expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) and production of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, is a key event in connective tissue remodeling. Approaches to inhibit this transformation are needed in tissues, such as the heart, where excessive ECM production by cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) causes fibrosis, myocardial stiffening, and cardiac dysfunction. We tested whether adenylyl cyclase (AC) activation (increased cAMP levels) modulates the transformation of adult rat CF to myofibroblasts, as assessed by immunofluorescent microscopy, immunoblotting, and collagen synthesis. A 24-h incubation of CF with TGF-beta or angiotensin II increased alpha-SMA expression, which was inhibited by the AC agonist forskolin and a cAMP analog that activates protein kinase A. Treatment with forskolin blunted serum-, TGF-beta-, and angiotensin II-stimulated collagen synthesis. CFs engineered to overexpress type 6 AC had enhanced forskolin-promoted cAMP formation, greater inhibition by forskolin of TGF-beta-stimulated alpha-SMA expression, and a decrease in the EC(50) of forskolin to reduce serum-stimulated collagen synthesis. The AC stimulatory agonist adrenomedullin inhibited collagen synthesis in CF that overexpressed AC6 but not in controls. Thus, AC stimulation blunts collagen synthesis and, in parallel, the transformation of adult rat CF to myofibroblasts. AC overexpression enhances these effects, &quot;uncovering&quot; an inhibition by adrenomedullin. These findings implicate cAMP as an inhibitor of ECM formation by means of blockade of the transformation of CF to myofibroblasts and suggest that increasing AC expression, thereby enhancing cAMP generation through stimulation of receptors expressed on CF, could provide a means to attenuate and prevent cardiac fibrosis and its sequelae.<newchar><newabs>12754293<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) such as gelatinases are believed to play an important role in invasion and metastasis of cancer. In this study we investigated the possible role of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in an experimental model of colon cancer metastasis in rat liver. We demonstrated with gelatin zymography that the tumors contained MMP-2 and MMP-9, but only MMP-2 was present in the active form. Immunolocalization of MMP-2 showed that the protein was localized at basement membranes of colon cancer cells and in intratumor stroma, associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) components. However, zymography and immunohistochemistry (IHC) do not provide information on the localization of MMP activity. Therefore, we developed an in situ zymography technique using the quenched fluorogenic substrate DQ-gelatin in unfixed cryostat sections. The application of DQ-gelatin in combination with a gelled medium allows precise localization of gelatinolytic activity. Fluorescence due to gelatinolytic activity was found in the ECM of tumors and was localized similarly to both MMP-2 protein and collagen type IV, its natural substrate. The localization of MMP-2 activity and collagen type IV at similar sites suggests a role of MMP-2 in remodeling of ECM of stroma in colon cancer metastases in rat liver.<newchar><newabs>15246110<newchar>Tissue engineering of heart valves utilizes biodegradable or metabolizable scaffolds for remodeling by seeded autologous cells. The aim of this study was to determine and compare extracellular matrix (ECM) formations, cellular phenotypes and cell location of native and tissue engineered (TE) valve leaflets. Ovine carotid arteries, ovine and porcine hearts were obtained from slaughterhouses. Cells were isolated from carotid arteries and dissected ovine, porcine and TE leaflets. TE constructs were fabricated from decellularized porcine pulmonary valves, seeded ovine arterial cells and subsequent 16 days dynamic in vitro culture using a pulsatile bioreactor. Native and TE valves were studied by histology (hematoxylin-eosin, resorcin-fuchsin, Movat pentachrome), NIR femtosecond multiphoton laser scanning microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Cells of native and TE tissues were identified and localized by immunohistochemistry. Arterial, valvular and re-isolated TE-construct cells were processed for immunocytochemistry and Western blotting. ECM analysis and SEM revealed characteristical and comparable structures in native and TE leaflets. Most cells in native leaflets stained strongly positive for vimentin. Cells positive to alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), myosin and calponin were only found at the ventricular (inflow) side of ovine aortic and porcine pulmonary valve leaflets. Cells from TE constructs had a strong expression of vimentin, alpha-SMA, myosin, calponin and h-caldesmon throughout the entire leaflet. Comparable ECM formation and endothelial cell lining of native and TE leaflets could be demonstrated. However, immunostaining revealed significant differences between valvular cell phenotypes of native and TE leaflets. These results may be essential for further cardiovascular tissue engineering efforts.<newchar><newabs>16150113<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) maintain the crucial role in physiological turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in gastric tissues. However, a little is known about the relationship of MMPs with ECM degradation during gastric ulceration and ECM remodeling during healing. Our objective was to investigate the effect of melatonin (N-acetyl-5 methoxytryptamine) on the regulation of MMP-9 and MMP-2 activity during prevention of gastric ulcer. In the present study, biochemical and zymographic methods were used to analyze the mechanism of melatonin in indomethacin-induced gastric ulcer in a rat model. Our studies reveal that melatonin dose-dependently downregulates the expression and secretion of pro-MMP-9 which is induced (approximately 10-fold) during indomethacin-induced gastric ulceration. Furthermore, melatonin prevents gastric ulceration in a dose-dependent manner through upregulation (approximately two- to threefold) of both pro-MMP-2 and active MMP-2 at the level of induction as well as secretion. It also prevents gastric ulcers by blocking glutathione depletion and lipid peroxidation in cytosolic and microsomal fractions. The novel findings of this study are attributed to the attenuation of the pro-MMP-9 and increase of MMP-2 activity by pretreatment with melatonin. The finding defines one of the MMP-mediated pathways for melatonin's action in gastric ulcer.<newchar><newabs>12579520<newchar>Cardiac hypertrophy is characterized by remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Integrins are cell-surface molecules that link the ECM to the cellular cytoskeleton where they play roles as signaling molecules and transducers of mechanical force. To clarify the possible roles of integrins in cardiac myocyte hypertrophy, we investigated the cellular localization and expression of ECM proteins and integrins in both normal cardiac myocytes and phenylephrine-induced hypertrophic myocytes. Addition of phenylephrine (PE) to cultured neonatal cardiac myocytes induced sarcomeric organization, increase in cell size, and synthesis of the hypertrophic marker, atrial natriuretic factor (ANF). In particular, fibronectin and collagen underwent dramatic localization changes during PE-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Significant changes were noted in the cellular localization of the respective collagen and fibronectin receptors, integrin alpha1 and alpha5, from diffuse to a sarcomeric banding pattern. Expression levels of integrins were also increased during hypertrophy. Treatment with okadaic acid (OA), an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), resulted in inhibition of hypertrophic response. These results suggest that dephosphorylation of integrin beta1 may be important in the induction of cardiac hypertrophy.<newchar><newabs>12855404<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) expansion contributes to airway remodeling in asthma. This study examines the effect of leukotriene D4 (LTD4), combined with epidermal growth factor (EGF), on proteoglycan synthesis by cultured human bronchial smooth muscle cells (BSMCs). LTD4 plus EGF stimulated proliferation of BSMCs with increased versican synthesis. Further, versican mRNA splice variants, V0 and V1, were differently regulated in BSMCs by LTD4 plus EGF. Synthesis of [35S]-methionine labeled versican V0, as a percentage of total versican, was doubled. This upregulation was confirmed by Western analysis. Synthetic changes were paralleled by alterations in versican V0 mRNA. The effects of LTD4 and EGF on proteoglycan synthesis were inhibited by montelukast. Similar upregulation of versican V0 was observed in arterial smooth muscle cells (ASMCs) stimulated with LTD4 plus EGF as measured by western and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses. Changes in ECM in the asthmatic airway may parallel those in atherosclerotic lesions where proliferating ASMCs synthesize a versican-rich expanded ECM. Inhibition of these processes could lead to reduced tissue expansion in the early phases of asthma progression.<newchar><newabs>14639599<newchar>Development and progression of epithelial malignancies are frequently accompanied by complex phenotypic alterations of resident tissue fibroblasts. Some of these changes, such as myofibroblastic differentiation and an oncofetal extracellular matrix (ECM) expression profile, are also implicated in inflammation and tissue repair. Studies over the past decade revealed the relevance of reciprocal interactions between tumor cells and tumor-associated host fibroblasts (TAF) in the malignant process. In many tumors, a considerable fraction of the inflammatory infiltrate is located within the fibroblast- and ECM-rich stromal compartment. However, while fibroblasts are known as &quot;sentinel cells&quot; in various nonneoplastic diseases, where they often regulate the composition and function of recruited leucocytes, they are hardly considered active participants in the inflammatory host response in tumors. This article focuses on the functional impact of TAF on immune cells. The complex network of immune-modulating effects transduced by TAF and TAF-derived factors is highlighted, and recent reports that support the hypothesis that TAF are involved in the inflammatory response and immune suppression in tumors are reviewed. The role of TAF-dependent ECM remodeling and TAF-derived peptide growth factors, cytokines, and chemokines in the immune modulation is stressed and the idea of TAF as an important therapeutic target is emphasized.<newchar><newabs>15872050<newchar>Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) and thrombospondin-2 (TSP-2) are structurally unrelated matricellular proteins that have important roles in cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions and tissue repair. SPARC-null mice exhibit accelerated wound closure, and TSP-2-null mice show an overall enhancement in wound healing. To assess potential compensation of one protein for the other, we examined cutaneous wound healing and fibrovascular invasion of subcutaneous sponges in SPARC-TSP-2 (ST) double-null and wild-type (WT) mice. Epidermal closure of cutaneous wounds was found to occur significantly faster in ST-double-null mice, compared with WT animals: histological analysis of dermal wound repair revealed significantly more mature phases of healing at 1, 4, 7, 10, and 14 days after wounding, and electron microscopy showed disrupted ECM at 14 days in these mice. ST-double-null dermal fibroblasts displayed accelerated migration, relative to WT fibroblasts, in a wounding assay in vitro, as well as enhanced contraction of native collagen gels. Zymography indicated that fibroblasts from ST-double-null mice also produced higher levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2. These data are consistent with the increased fibrovascular invasion of subcutaneous sponge implants seen in the double-null mice. The generally accelerated wound healing of ST-double-null mice reflects that described for the single-null animals. Importantly, the absence of both proteins results in elevated MMP-2 levels. SPARC and TSP-2 therefore perform similar functions in the regulation of cutaneous wound healing, but fine-tuning with respect to ECM production and remodeling could account for the enhanced response seen in ST-double-null mice.<newchar><newabs>12367589<newchar>The brain renin-angiotensin system mediates several classic physiologies including body water balance, maintenance of blood pressure, cyclicity of reproductive hormones and sexual behaviors, and regulation of pituitary gland hormones. In addition, angiotensin peptides have been implicated in neural plasticity and memory. The present review initially describes the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the roles of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), matrix metalloproteinases, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in the maintenance and degradation of the ECM. It is the ECM that appears to permit synaptic remodeling and thus is critical to the plasticity that is presumed to underlie mechanisms of memory consolidation and retrieval. The interrelationship among long-term potentiation (LTP), CAMs, and synaptic strengthening is described, followed by the influence of angiotensins on LTP. There is strong support for an inhibitory influence by angiotensin II (AngII) and a facilitory role by angiotensin IV (AngIV), on LTP. Next, the influences of AngII and IV on associative and spatial memories are summarized. Finally, the impact of sleep deprivation on matrix metalloproteinases and memory function is described. Recent findings indicate that sleep deprivation-induced memory impairment is accompanied by a lack of appropriate changes in matrix metalloproteinases within the hippocampus and neocortex as compared with non-sleep deprived animals. These findings generally support an important contribution by angiotensin peptides to neural plasticity and memory consolidation.<newchar><newabs>16525826<newchar>The present study was carried out in order to examine molecular alterations of extracellular matrix (ECM), associated with cell-cell communication in conventional (clear-cell) renal cell carcinomas (cRCCs) influenced by persistent long-term, low-dose ionizing radiation (IR) exposure to patients living more than 19 years after the Chernobyl accident in Cesium 137 (137Cs)-contaminated areas of Ukraine. The ECM major components such as fibronectin, laminin, E-cadherin/beta-catenin complexes and p53 tumor suppressor gene protein, and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) were immunohistochemically (IHC) evaluated in cRCCs from 59 Ukrainian patients, which represented 18 patients living in non-contaminated areas and 41 patients from 137Cs-contaminated areas. In contrast, a control group of 19 Spanish patients with analogue tumors were also investigated. For IHC evaluation, a tissue microarray technique was used. Decrease or loss and abnormal distribution of fibronectin, laminin, E-cadherin/beta-catenin complexes accompanied by elevated levels of p53 and TGF-beta1 were detected in the Ukrainian cRCCs from 137Cs-contaminated areas with statistically significant differences. Thus, our study suggests that chronic long-term, low-dose IR exposure might result in global remodeling of ECM components of the cRCCs with disruption in peri-epithelial stroma and epithelial basement membranes.<newchar><newabs>14621299<newchar>Arterial occlusive disease remains the leading cause of death in western countries and often requires vascular reconstructive surgery. The limited supply of suitable small-diameter vascular grafts has led to the development of tissue engineered blood vessel substitutes. Many different approaches have been examined, including natural scaffolds containing one or more ECM proteins and degradable polymeric scaffolds. For optimal graft development, many efforts have modified the culture environment to enhance ECM synthesis and organization using bioreactors under physiologic conditions and biochemical supplements. In the past couple of decades, a great deal of progress on TEVGs has been made. Many challenges remain and are being addressed, particularly with regard to the prevention of thrombosis and the improvement of graft mechanical properties. To develop a patent TEVG that grossly resembles native tissue, required culture times in most studies exceed 8 weeks. Even with further advances in the field, TEVGs will likely not be used in emergency situations because of the time necessary to allow for cell expansion, ECM production and organization, and attainment of desired mechanical strength. Furthermore, TEVGs will probably require the use of autologous tissue to prevent an immunogenic response, unless advances in immune acceptance render allogenic and xenogenic tissue use feasible. TEVGs have not yet been subjected to clinical trials, which will determine the efficacy of such grafts in the long term. Finally, off-the-shelf availability and cost will become the biggest hurdles in the development of a feasible TEVG product. Although many obstacles exist in the effort to develop a small-diameter TEVG, the potential benefits of such an achievement are exciting. In the near future, a nonthrombogenic TEVG with sufficient mechanical strength may be developed for clinical trials. Such a graft will have the minimum characteristics of biological tissue necessary to remain patent over a period comparable to current vein graft therapies. As science and technology advance, TEVGs may evolve into complex blood vessel substitutes. TEVGs may become living grafts, capable of growing, remodeling, and responding to mechanical and biochemical stimuli in the surrounding environment. These blood vessel substitutes will closely resemble native vessels in almost every way, including structure, composition, mechanical properties, and function. They will possess vasoactive properties and be able to dilate and constrict in response to stimuli. Close mimicry of native blood vessels may aid in the engineering of other tissues dependent upon vasculature to sustain function. With further understanding of the factors involved in cardiovascular development and function combined with the foundation of knowledge already in place, the development of TEVGs should one day lead to improved quality of life for those with vascular disease and other life-threatening conditions.<newchar><newabs>11285454<newchar>Despite extensive genetic and immunological research, the complex etiology and pathogenesis of type I diabetes remains unresolved. During the last few years, our attention has been focused on factors such as abnormalities of islet function and/or microenvironment, that could interact with immune partners in the spontaneous model of the disease, the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse. Intriguingly, the first anomalies that we noted in NOD mice, compared to control strains, are already present at birth and consist of 1) higher numbers of paradoxically hyperactive beta cells, assessed by in situ preproinsulin II expression; 2) high percentages of immature islets, representing islet neogenesis related to neonatal beta-cell hyperactivity and suggestive of in utero beta-cell stimulation; 3) elevated levels of some types of antigen-presenting cells and FasL+ cells, and 4) abnormalities of extracellular matrix (ECM) protein expression. However, the colocalization in all control mouse strains studied of fibroblast-like cells (anti-TR-7 labeling), some ECM proteins (particularly, fibronectin and collagen I), antigen-presenting cells and a few FasL+ cells at the periphery of islets undergoing neogenesis suggests that remodeling phenomena that normally take place during postnatal pancreas development could be disturbed in NOD mice. These data show that from birth onwards there is an intricate relationship between endocrine and immune events in the NOD mouse. They also suggest that tissue-specific autoimmune reactions could arise from developmental phenomena taking place during fetal life in which ECM-immune cell interaction(s) may play a key role.<newchar><newabs>11889208<newchar>Extensive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is found in many processes during human parturition at term and preterm. These include cervical ripening, fetal membrane rupture, and placental detachment from the maternal uterus. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the main mediators of ECM degradation. The present study was designed to investigate the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in human fetal membranes (FMs) and placental (PL) tissues with or without labor at preterm and term parturition. Both zymography and Western blot analysis showed that MMP-9 was significantly (P &lt; 0.01) increased in preterm and term labor FM, compared with nonlabor. Term labor PL also had a much higher (P &lt; 0.05) level of MMP-9 than that of term nonlabor. No significant difference in MMP-2 expression was found between labor and nonlabor tissues. Immunolocalization studies revealed a specific distribution pattern for MMP-2 and MMP-9. MMP-2 was localized to the amnion mesenchyme, chorion laeve trophoblast, decidua parietalis, and blood vessels in PL villi. MMP-9 was localized mainly to amnion epithelia, chorion laeve trophoblast, decidua parietalis, and PL syncytiotrophoblasts. Separate cell culture from different layers of FM and culture of purified PL trophoblast cells showed that PL syncytiotrophoblast and amnion epithelial cells exclusively produced MMP-9; chorion trophoblast cells secreted both MMP-2 and MMP-9, but amnion mesenchymal cells produced only MMP-2. We concluded that MMP-2 and MMP-9 exhibited cell-specific expression in the human PL. An increase in MMP-9 expression may contribute to degradation of the ECM in the FM and PL, thereby facilitating FM rupture and PL detachment from the maternal uterus at labor, both preterm and term.<newchar><newabs>12023510<newchar>Interstitial lung diseases associated with hypoxia, such as lung fibrosis, are characterized by enhanced production of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and increased deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules, including glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). In this study, we investigated the effect of hypoxia (3% O(2)) on TGF-beta-induced GAG synthesis by primary human pulmonary fibroblasts, established from lung biopsies. Total GAG synthesis was assessed by the incorporation of [(3)H]glucosamine into GAGs associated with the cell layer (cells and ECM) or secreted in the medium. GAGs were isolated and purified by gel filtration, fractionated by electrophoresis on cellulose acetate membranes, and characterized using GAG-degrading enzymes. GAG molecules identified in the cell layer and the medium were: hyaluronic acid, and chondroitin, dermatan, and heparan sulfates. All TGF-beta isoforms time dependently induced [(3)H]glucosamine incorporation into GAGs of the cell layer or the medium. Characterization of individual GAG molecules indicated that this was attributed to dermatan and heparan sulfates in the cell layer and to hyaluronic acid and chondroitin and dermatan sulfates in the medium. Hypoxia enhanced the effect of all TGF-beta isoforms, particularly that of TGF-beta3, on the secretion of hyaluronic acid and chondroitin and dermatan sulfates. In the cell layer, hypoxia stimulated only the effect of TGF-beta2-induced [(3)H]glucosamine incorporation into GAGs. Our data indicate that hypoxia differentially enhances the effect of TGF-beta isoforms on the secretion and deposition of GAGs and may hasten ECM remodeling associated with the pathogenesis of lung fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>16318765<newchar>Myopia is the most common eye disorder worldwide. So far there is no effective treatment for the disease. Recent findings indicated that the remodeling of scleral extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in the development of myopia. The dynamic changes of matrix metalloproteinases in myopia (MMPs) activity, one of the most important enzymes that regulates the ECM, has a significant correlation with myopia. This review gives the latest findings about ECM and MMPs in the development of myopia.<newchar><newabs>11278621<newchar>Fibrosis is characterized by the excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM), especially collagen. Because Ets factors are implicated in physiological and pathological ECM remodeling, the aim of this study was to investigate the role of Ets factors in collagen production. We demonstrate that the expression of collagenous proteins and collagen alpha2(I) (COL1A2) mRNA was inhibited following stable transfection of Fli-1 in dermal fibroblasts. Subsequent analysis of the COL1A2 promoter identified a critical Ets binding site that mediates Fli-1 inhibition. In contrast, Ets-1 stimulates COL1A2 promoter activity. In vitro binding assays demonstrate that both Fli-1 and Ets-1 form DNA-protein complexes with sequences present in COL1A2 promoter. Furthermore, Fli-1 binding to the COL1A2 is enhanced via Sp1-dependent interaction. Studies using Fli-1 dominant interference and DNA binding mutants indicate that Fli-1 inhibition is mediated by both direct (DNA binding) and indirect (via protein-protein interaction) mechanisms and that Sp1 is an important mediator of the Fli-1 function. Furthermore, experiments using the Gal4 system in the context of different cell types as well as experiments with the COL1A2 promoter in different cell lines demonstrate that the direction and magnitude of the effect of Fli-1 is promoter- and cell context-specific. We propose that Fli-1 inhibits COL1A2 promoter activity by competition with Ets-1. In addition, we postulate that another factor (co-repressor) may be required for maximal inhibition after recruitment to the Fli-1-Sp1 complex. We conclude that the ratio of Fli-1 to Ets-1 and the presence of co-regulatory proteins ultimately control ECM production in fibroblasts.<newchar><newabs>11212843<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM) and are considered to be important in neoplastic cell invasion and metastasis. Structural changes in the extracellular matrix are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and neoplastic cell invasion. Histochemical expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 was observed in 19 human colorectal carcinomas (CCs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase (AP) conjugated antigen detection technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D]. The two forms of stromelysin (SL), types 1 (MMP-3) and 2 (MMP-10), share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in all CC cases observed, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells, and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). Weak (surrounding anywhere between 10% and 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells, and of strong A,B intensity) expression of MMP-2 (gelatinase A) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B), two cytokine-induced MMPs, was also observed in CCs. Expression of collagenase-3 (MMP-13), an endopeptidase characterized by a potent degrading activity against a wide spectrum of substrates, was not defined in the CCs cases observed by us. It is clear that the activation of MMPs and their inhibitors occurs in a very well orchestrated manner. The necessity of these same enzymes for the extravasation and infiltration of lymphocytes into regions of chronic local inflammation, as associated with neoplastically transformed masses of cells, may aid the transformed cells which have already acquired a metastatic immunophenotype to enter the peripheral circulation. Further characterization of the expression and utilization of MMPs and their inhibitors in the progression of solid human neoplasms should lead to the development of novel anti-cancer therapies.<newchar><newabs>11167130<newchar>ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs) is a novel family of extracellular proteases found in both mammals and invertebrates. Members of the family may be distinguished from the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloprotease) family members based on the multiple copies of thrombospondin 1-like repeats they carry. With at least nine members in mammals alone, the ADAMTS family members are predicted by their structural domains to be extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins with a wide range of activities and functions distinct from members of the ADAM family that are largely anchored on the cell surface. ADAMTS2 is a procollagen N-proteinase, and the mutations of its gene are responsible for Human Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VII C and bovine dermatosparaxis. ADAMTS4 and ADAMTS5 are aggrecanases implicated in the degradation of cartilage aggrecan in arthritic diseases. Other members of the ADAMTS family have also been implicated in roles during embryonic development and angiogenesis. Current and future studies on this emerging group of ECM proteases may provide important insights into developmental or pathological processes involving ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>21340851<newchar>Tumors are microecosystems in which a continuous cross-talk between cancer cells and host cells decides on the invasive behavior of the tumor cell population as a whole (1). Both compartments secrete activating and inhibitory factors that modulate activities such as cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interaction, cell-cell adhesion, remodeling of the ECM, and cell motility. For this reason, confrontations of cancer cells with a living normal host tissue in organ culture have been introduced by several groups: Wolff and Schneider in France (2), Easty and Easty in the United Kingdom (3), and Schleich in Germany (4). Embryonic chick heart fragments in organ culture maintain many histological features of their tissue of origin: They are composed of myocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells, and their ECM contains fibronectin, laminin, and several collagen types. Moreover, the fragments remain contractile, and this activity allows the monitoring of their functional integrity during organ culture.<newchar><newabs>11532928<newchar>Fluid shear stress is a critical determinant of vascular remodeling and atherogenesis. Both integrins and the small GTPase Rho are implicated in endothelial cell responses to shear but the mechanisms are poorly understood. We now show that shear stress rapidly stimulates conformational activation of integrin alpha(v)beta3 in bovine aortic endothelial cells, followed by an increase in its binding to extracellular cell matrix (ECM) proteins. The shear-induced new integrin binding to ECM induces a transient inactivation of Rho similar to that seen when suspended cells are plated on ECM proteins. This transient inhibition is necessary for cytoskeletal alignment in the direction of flow. The results therefore define the role of integrins and Rho in a pathway leading to endothelial cell adaptation to flow.<newchar><newabs>19959644<newchar>Purpose. Glaucoma is a leading cause worldwide of blindness and visual impairment. Transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGFbeta2) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) based on elevated levels in glaucomatous aqueous humor and its ability to induce extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in the trabecular meshwork (TM). The goal of this study was to generate a rodent model of POAG using viral gene transfer of human TGFbeta2. Methods. Latent (hTGFbeta2(WT)) or active (C226S, C228S; hTGFbeta2(226/228)) TGFbeta2-encoding cDNA was cloned into the pac.Ad5.CMV.K-N.pA shuttle vector for generation of replication-deficient adenovirus. Empty adenovirus (Ad5.CMV.K-N.pA) was used as a control. Adenoviral expression of active and total TGFbeta2 was assayed in vitro by the transduction of Chinese hamster ovary and trabecular meshwork cells. BALB/cJ mice or Wistar rats were injected either intracamerally or intravitreally with the adenovectors and assessed for changes in intraocular pressure (IOP) using the rebound tonometer. At peak IOP, aqueous outflow facility and total TGFbeta2 levels in aqueous humor were measured. Mouse eye morphology was assessed by hematoxylin and eosin staining. Results. Adenoviral gene transfer of hTGFbeta2(226/228), but not hTGFbeta2(WT), to the rodent eye elevated IOP in rat (43%, P &lt; 0.001) and mouse (110%, P &lt; 0.001) and reduced aqueous humor outflow facility in the mouse. The TGFbeta2-induced ocular hypertension correlated with anterior segment TGFbeta2 expression levels (P &lt; 0.0001). Conclusions. The adenoviral TGFbeta2 rodent model displays the glaucoma risk factors of elevated IOP and decreased aqueous outflow facility and may potentially serve as a model for studying glaucoma.<newchar><newabs>10668212<newchar>Controlled degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential in many physiological situations including developmental tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, tissue repair, and normal turnover of ECM. In addition, degradation of matrix components is an important feature of tumor growth, invasion, metastasis, and tumor-induced angiogenesis. Matrix metallo-proteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent neutral endopeptidases, which are collectively capable of degrading essentially all ECM components. MMPs apparently play an important role in all the above mentioned aspects of tumor development. In addition, there is recent evidence that MMP activity is required for tumor cell survival. At present, several MMP inhibitors are in clinical trials of malignant tumors of different histogenetic origin. In this review we discuss the current view on the role of MMPs and their inhibitors in development and invasion of squamous cell carcinomas, as a basis for prognostication and therapeutic intervention in these tumors.<newchar><newabs>20036233<newchar>During cancer progression, tumor cells eventually invade the surrounding collagen-rich extracellular matrix. Here we show that squamous cell carcinoma cells strongly adhere to Type I collagen substrates but display limited motility and invasion on collagen barriers. Further analysis revealed that in addition to the alpha2beta1 integrin, a second collagen receptor was identified as Syndecan-1 (Sdc1), a cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan. We demonstrate that siRNA-mediated depletion of Sdc1 reduced adhesion efficiency to collagen I, whereas knockdown of Sdc4 was without effect. Importantly, silencing Sdc1 expression caused reduced focal adhesion plaque formation and enhanced cell spreading and motility on collagen I substrates, but did not alter cell motility on other ECM substrates. Sdc1 depletion ablated adhesion-induced RhoA activation. In contrast, Rac1 was strongly activated following Sdc1 knockdown, suggesting that Sdc1 may mediate the link between integrin-induced actin remodeling and motility. Taken together, these data substantiate the existence of a co-adhesion receptor system in tumor cells, whereby Sdc1 functions as a key regulator of cell motility and cell invasion by modulating RhoA and Rac activity. Downregulation of Sdc1 expression during carcinoma progression may represent a mechanism by which tumor cells become more invasive and metastatic.<newchar><newabs>20536451<newchar>Aberrant expression of thymosin beta4 (Tbeta4) has recently been found to be associated with colorectal carcinoma (CRC) progression evidently due to an increase of the motility and invasion of tumor cells and the induction of a proangiogenic phenotype of endothelial cells. Both mechanisms depend upon matrix-degrading proteases, particularly plasmin and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that are responsible for extensive tissue remodeling. Cleavage of ECM macromolecules weakens the structural integrity of tissues and exposes cryptic domains of extracellular components, which elicit biological responses distinct from intact molecules. Interestingly, signaling via integrins (alphaVbeta3, alpha5beta1) in CRC cells (HT29, CX1.1) is induced by Tbeta4 and VEGF-A only when they grow in 3D fibrin gels but not in 2D ones. The cells growing in 3D fibrin gels release upon Tbeta4 significant amounts of active MMPs (MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-7) that cause extensive proteolysis in their close vicinity. As evidenced by a variety of approaches (transfection experiments, coimmunoprecipitation, gene silencing with siRNA), we found that this involves interaction of Tbeta4 with Ku80, which has recently been described by us to mediate Tbeta4 intracellular activity.<newchar><newabs>20108253<newchar>Osteoclasts are large, mobile, bone-resorbing cells and play a critical role in bone remodeling and catabolic bone diseases. The major function of osteoclasts is to hydrolyze inorganic hydroxyapatite and degrade organic bone matrix, mainly collagen. For evaluation of differentiation to fully functional osteoclasts in vitro, a quantitative functional resorption assay is essential. Currently available commercial test systems are either based on the organic or the inorganic part of the bone matrix. The novel resorption assay presented here is based on decellularized osteoblast-derived matrix. SaOS-2 cells were used for the synthesis of a densely mineralized extracellular bone matrix (ECM) in alpha-MEM medium, which strongly accelerates their matrix synthesis. After removal of the SaOS-2 cells, osteoclast precursors are plated on the osteoblast-derived matrix and stained by von Kossa. Subsequently, resorption pits were quantified by densitometry using an imaging program. Using this novel assay, we show that (i) RAW 264.7 cells resorbed the osteoblast-derived matrix continuously from day 6 until day 9 of culture, a process that is dose dependent on the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) concentration, (ii) the resorption performance of RAW 264.7 was dose-dependently inhibited by IFN-gamma, and (iii) the assay is working with primary human and mouse osteoclast precursors as well. In conclusion, this quantitative, functional, easy-to-use, inexpensive assay will advance analysis of osteoclast biology.<newchar><newabs>19690761<newchar>Fibroblasts represent the main cellular population in the connective tissue; they have a central role in extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis, degradation and remodeling. These cells may express a substantial heterogeneity regarding their morphology and functions in pathological conditions and during tissue remodeling. Myofibroblasts are a good example for heterogeneity and phenotypical changes. These cells can be morphologically and immunologically defined by the expression of specific cytoskeleton proteins. Myofibroblasts show cytoplasmic actin microfilaments organized as stress fibers and interconnected by gap or adherens junctions. These cells come also in contact with extracellular matrix by focal contacts. Myofibroblasts play fundamental roles in pathologic conditions, even by activation and proliferation or by deletion. Moreover, these cells seem to be involved in formation and repair of the ECM compounds, proliferation and differentiation of the epithelial, vascular or neurogenic elements. The purpose of the present study is to emphasize the presence and distribution of myofibroblasts in the reactive stromal tissue of granulation tumors in the oral area, fibroinflammatory epulis and giant cells peripheral granuloma, by means of immunocytochemical and transmission electron microscopy studies. Both tumor types shown a common characteristic of the presence of reactive inflammatory stromal tissue and myofibroblasts are a common issue.<newchar><newabs>19166201<newchar>In this study, we assessed the effects of shear stress on the expression of plasminogen activator(tPA and uPA) mRNA in cultured NRK-52E cells (a kidney proximal tubular epithelial cell line of normal rat origin) and investigated the mechanism of tubulointerstitial extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in the early stage of diabetic nephropathy (DN). The cultured NRK-52E cells were exposed to shear stress of 5 and 10 dyn/cm2 for 1, 3 and 6 hours respectively. Semi-quantity RT-PCR was used to detect the expression of tPA and uPA mRNA. Shear stress down-regulated the expression of tPA and uPA mRNA in cultured NRK-52E cells in a magnitude and time-dependent way. The results suggested that the increased tubular shear stress in the early-stage of DN could decrease the expression of tPA and uPA in renal proximal tubular cells, lead to the reduction of tubulointerstitial fibrinolytic activity and involve in the remodeling of ECM.<newchar><newabs>18989628<newchar>The bone formation executed by osteoblasts represents an interesting research field both for basic and applied investigations. The goal of this work was to evaluate the molecular mechanisms involved during osteoblast differentiation in vitro. Accordingly, we demonstrated that, during the osteoblastic differentiation, TIMP-2 and RECK presented differential expressions, where RECK expression was downregulated from the 14th day in contrast with an increase in TIMP-2. Concomitantly, our results showed a temporal regulation of two major signaling cascades during osteoblast differentiation: proliferation cascades in which RECK, PI3 K, and GSK-3beta play a pivotal role and latter, differentiation cascades with participation of Ras, Rho, Rac-1, PKC alpha/beta, and TIMP-2. Furthermore, we observed that phosphorylation level of paxillin was downregulated while FAK(125) remained unchangeable, but active during extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Concluding, our results provide evidences that RECK and TIMP-2 are involved in the control of ECM remodeling in distinct phases of osteoblast differentiation by modulating MMP activities and a multitude of signaling proteins governs these events.<newchar><newabs>18788289<newchar>To investigate the effect of different frequencies of cyclic tensile strain on extracellular matrix (ECM) of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and to research the relationship between tensile strain and vascular remodeling, the aortic vascular smooth muscle cells of rats grown on dishes coated with collagen I were subjected to 10% elongation and various frequencies of mechanical strain using the Flexercell 4000 Strain Unit. The expression of extracellular matrix including fibronectin, collagen I and collagen III was detected by Real-time RT-PCR, and p38 activity by western blot. The result showed that the expression of extracellular matrix was induced by mechanical strain in a nonlinear frequency-dependent manner, which was mediated by p38 pathway. These results demonstrate that the variety of frequencies of cyclic tensile strain could modulate the expression of ECM. It may have important influence on vascular remodeling.<newchar><newabs>20339231<newchar>Heparanase is an endoglycosidase that cleaves heparan sulfate (HS), thus participating in degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Heparanase up-regulation is correlated with lymph node and distant metastasis, microvessel density and reduced postoperative survival of cancer patients. In the present study, we carried out an immunohistochemical investigation of heparanase to extend and confirm present knowledge regarding its expression in ameloblastomas (AMs), which are characterized by locally aggressive behavior. Paraffin-embedded tissue specimens of 53 AMs were stained using an antibody against heparanase. Immunohistochemical reactivity for heparanase was detected in 94.3% of the AMs examined. Heparanase was expressed strongly in peripheral columnar cells and slightly in central stellate reticulum-like cells. Small tumor nests and budding epithelial branches showed a stronger staining pattern. Stromal cells were negative for heparanase, or showed diffuse expression. However, an enhanced positive immunoreaction was present specifically near osseous tissue and adjacent to the invasive front of tumor nests. Areas of cystic degeneration showed intense heparanase immunoreactivity. The enzyme may facilitate the function of HS-binding growth factors that elicit an angiogenic response and favor osteoclastogenesis in AM.<newchar><newabs>18692064<newchar>Remodeling of atrial extracellular matrix (ECM) in atrial fibrillation (AF) involves changes in the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs). The contributions of MMPs and TIMPs to the pathogenesis of AF development have not been clearly defined. This study evaluated the in situ activity and expression of gelatinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) and their relationship with TIMP-1 or TIMP-3 in atria undergoing rapid atrial pacing for the induction of AF (4 weeks' pacing followed by 2 weeks of maintained AF) in pigs. In AF atria, in situ gelatinase activity was mainly localized in the interstitium of atrial myocardium, and was significantly larger than that of sinus rhythm control (i.e., sham control). The significant increase of MMP-9 in its pro-form and mRNA level, but not MMP-2, was shown to be responsible for the increased gelatinase activity in atria with AF. The inhibitory activities of glycosylated TIMP-1 and TIMP-3, but not TIMP-2, in AF tissues were markedly elevated and also localized in the atrial interstitium. TIMP-1 was found to be mostly colocalized with gelatinase activity over the AF tissues, implying the coexistence of gelatinase activity and TIMP-1, but TIMP-3 appeared only partially colocalized and discontinued the gelatinase activity surrounding the cardiomyocytes. TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 may play differential roles in the inhibition of gelatinase activity in vivo. Together with the survey of several MMPs transcripts and the level of transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), we proposed that the increased activity of gelatinase (i.e., MMP-9), TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 and their interaction may contribute to atrial ECM remodeling of AF.<newchar><newabs>20448817<newchar>Cystic fibrosis (CF) is chronic lung disease characterized by an unrelenting neutrophil-predominant airway inflammatory response. This inflammation leads to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and eventually to the development of bronchiectasis. While many components of the immune response in CF have been well-characterized, recent data suggests that small molecules may play an important and underappreciated role in this inflammation. This review will examine two novel molecules: proline-glycine-proline (PGP) and high mobility group box protein-1 (HMGB1), and their potential impact in CF lung disease. This review will provide a brief overview of CF lung disease and background on both HMGB1 and PGP. It will then focus on these molecules in a murine model of CF-like airway disease and in human biological specimens from CF individuals. Finally, this manuscript will address possible mechanisms for therapeutic targeting of these bioactive mediators.<newchar>Inflammation<n-term>airway<n-term>cystic fibrosis<n-term>neutrophils<n-term>therapeutics.<n-term><newabs>17522380<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is one of the underlying mechanisms in cardiovascular diseases. Cathepsin cysteine proteases have a central role in ECM remodeling and have been implicated in the development and progression of cardiovascular diseases. Cathepsins also show differential expression in various stages of atherosclerosis, and in vivo knockout studies revealed that deficiency of cathepsin K or S reduces atherosclerosis. Furthermore, cathepsins are involved in lipid metabolism. Cathepsins have the capability to degrade low-density lipoprotein and reduce cholesterol efflux from macrophages, aggravating foam cell formation. Although expression studies also demonstrated differential expression of cathepsins in cardiovascular diseases like aneurysm formation, neointima formation, and neovascularization, in vivo studies to define the exact role of cathepsins in these processes are lacking. Evaluation of the feasibility of cathepsins as a diagnostic tool revealed that serum levels of cathepsins L and S seem to be promising as biomarkers in the diagnosis of atherosclerosis, whereas cathepsin B shows potential as an imaging tool. Furthermore, cathepsin K and S inhibitors showed effectiveness in (pre) clinical evaluation for the treatment of osteoporosis and osteoarthritis, suggesting that cathepsin inhibitors may also have therapeutic effects for the treatment of atherosclerosis.<newchar><newabs>18420197<newchar>Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a potent vaso-active peptide, mediates extracellular matrix regulation resulting in an increase in collagen deposition in various cell types and tissues and has been proposed to play a key role in glaucoma pathology. The role of ET-1 in the regulation of extracellular matrix collagens at the level of optic nerve head is not known. In this study we have examined the role of ET-1 in extracellular matrix collagen regulation in primary cultures of human lamina cribrosa cells. Our hypothesis is that ET-1 increases remodeling of the ECM of cells of the lamina cribrosa. Such actions could contribute to the development of optic neuropathy. QPCR analysis revealed that ET-1 mediated an increase in mRNA levels of collagen type I alpha1 and collagen type VI alpha1 chains at all doses of ET-1 with a significant increase at 1nM and 10nM concentration in LC cells. A dose-dependent increase in collagen type I and type VI protein deposition and secretion was also observed by Western blot in response to ET-1 and was significant at 10nM and 100nM concentrations of ET-1. ET-1 increased the [3H] proline uptake in LC cells suggesting that ET-1 contributed to an increase in total collagen synthesis in LC cells. ET-1-mediated increase in collagen type I, type VI and total collagen synthesis was significantly blocked by the ET(A) receptor antagonist, BQ610, as well as with the ET(B) receptor antagonist, BQ788, suggesting the involvement of both receptor subtypes in ET-1 mediated collagen synthesis in LC cells. These results suggest that ET-1 regulates extracellular matrix collagen synthesis in LC cells and may contribute to ECM remodeling at the level of LC of POAG subjects who have elevated plasma and aqueous humor levels of endothelin-1.<newchar><newabs>17275288<newchar>1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25D] deficiency and vitamin D receptor [VDR] genotypes are risk factors for several diseases and disorders including heart diseases. Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling mediated by matrix metalloproteinases [MMPs] contributes to progressive left ventricular remodeling, dilation, and heart failure. In the present study, we used high-density oligonucleotide microarray to examine gene expression profile in wild type [WT] and vitamin D receptor knockout mice (VDR KO) which was further validated by RT-PCR. Microarray analysis revealed tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases [TIMP-1 and TIMP-3] were significantly under expressed in VDR KO mice as compared to WT mice which was further validated by RT-PCR. Zymography and RT-PCR showed that MMP-2 and MMP-9 were up regulated in VDR KO mice. In addition, cross-sectional diameter and longitudinal width of the VDR KO heart myofibrils showed highly significant cellular hypertrophy. Trichrome staining showed marked increase in fibrotic lesions in the VDR KO mice. Heart weight to body weight ratio showed approximately 41% increase in VDR KO mice when compared to WT mice. This data supports a role for 1,25D in heart ECM metabolism and suggests that MMPs and TIMPs expression may be modulated by vitamin D.<newchar><newabs>17111536<newchar>Remodeling of airways and blood vessels is an important feature in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). By using immunohistochemical analysis, we examined bronchial expression patterns of various extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as collagens (subtypes I, III, and IV), fibronectin, and laminin beta2 in patients with COPD (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] &lt;or=75%; n = 15) and without COPD (FEV1 &gt;or=85%; n = 16) and correlated expression data with lung function. Quantitative analysis revealed enhanced levels (P &lt; .01) of total collagens I, III, and IV in surface epithelial basement membrane (SEBM) and collagens I and III in bronchial lamina propria (P &lt; .02) and adventitia (P &lt; .05) in COPD. Distinct and increased (P &lt; .05) vascular expression of fibronectin accounts for intimal vascular fibrosis, whereas laminin beta2 (P &lt; .05) was elevated in airway smooth muscle (ASM). FEV1 values inversely correlated with collagens in the SEBM, fibronectin in bronchial vessels, and laminin in the ASM. Our data suggest that COPD exhibits increased bronchial deposition of ECM proteins that contribute to deteriorated lung function and airway remodeling.<newchar><newabs>15886356<newchar>Functionally overloading rat soleus muscle by synergist ablation induces a rapid increase in mass. Muscle remodeling during the first week of overload is critical for the overload-induced growth. Anabolic steroid modulation of this overload-induced remodeling response is not well understood. The purpose of this study was to determine whether pretreatment with nandrolone decanoate, a clinically administered anabolic steroid, alters muscle morphology and gene expression related to muscle growth during the initiation of functional overload in the rat soleus muscle. Adult (5 mo) male Fisher 344 x Brown Norway rats were randomly assigned to control (Sham), 3-day functional overload (OV), nandrolone decanoate administration (ND), or 3-day functional overload with nandrolone decanoate administration (OV+ND) treatment groups. Morphologically, OV increased the percentage of small (361%) and large (150%) fibers and expanded the ECM 50%. ND administration decreased the 3-day OV induction of small fibers 51% and nuclei associated with the ECM 20%. ND administration also attenuated the induction of cell cycle regulator p21 (64%) and myogenin (37%) mRNAs after 3 days of overload. These data demonstrate that nandrolone decanoate pretreatment can alter morphological and cell cycle regulator expression related to muscle growth at the onset of functional overload.<newchar><newabs>18765947<newchar>Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) are potentially devastating, and due to their asymptomatic behavior, pose a serious health risk characterized by the lack of medical treatment options and high rates of surgical morbidity and mortality. Independent of the inciting stimuli (biochemical/mechanical), TAA development proceeds by a multifactorial process influenced by both cellular and extracellular mechanisms, resulting in alterations of the structure and composition of the vascular extracellular matrix (ECM). While the role of enhanced ECM proteolysis in TAA formation remains undisputed, little attention has been focused on the upstream signaling events that drive the remodeling process. Recent evidence highlighting the dysregulation of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling in ascending TAAs from Marfan syndrome patients has stimulated an interest in this intracellular signaling pathway. However, paradoxical discoveries have implicated both enhanced TGF-beta signaling and loss of function TGF-beta receptor mutations, in aneurysm formation; obfuscating a clear functional role for TGF-beta in aneurysm development. In an effort to elucidate this subject, TGF-beta signaling and its role in vascular remodeling and pathology will be reviewed, with the aim of identifying potential mechanisms of how TGF-beta signaling may contribute to the formation and progression of TAA.<newchar><newabs>15344595<newchar>Latent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection has been implicated in diseases characterized by tissue remodeling. Because of recent evidence indicating the possibility of a partial HCMV reactivation, the purpose of this study was to examine the role of the HCMV immediate early (IE) genes in the regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) related host genes. Adenoviral vector expressing IE1 was generated to allow efficient gene delivery into human fibroblasts. IE1 stimulated the prolonged expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and TIMP1. IE1-dependent stimulation of CTGF was partially mediated by TGF-beta. Moreover, whereas collagenous proteins and collagen type 1 mRNA were only transiently induced by IE1 in the majority of fibroblasts, in selected fibroblast strains IE1 induced persistent ECM upregulation for up to 120 hours. This study suggests that transient or limited HCMV reactivation may play a direct role in abnormal matrix remodeling in GVHD, scleroderma, atherosclerosis and other HCMV-linked diseases.<newchar><newabs>15130518<newchar>The aims of this study were to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which growth hormone (GH) excess is anti-fibrotic in vitro and in vivo model. The in vivo model GH excess showed a significant increase of relative wall thickness with no concomitant disturbance of cardiac diastolic function. Western blot for extracellular matrix (ECM) structural proteins showed minimal change in the GH treatment group, compared to an Angiotensin II (Ang II) subpressor dose group. In cultured cardiac fibroblasts, we investigated the abundance of ECM proteins, phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-specific transcriptional activity. GH down-regulated the expression of PAI-1 and fibronectin proteins activated by TGF-beta. In reporter assays, GH, but not insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), reduced TGF-beta-specific transcriptional activity. Moreover, GH markedly down-regulated TGF-beta-induced phosphorylation of p38 MAPK. These results demonstrated that a chronic excess of GH have an anti-fibrotic effect on cardiac remodeling, probably through a down-regulation of TGF-beta signaling via de-phosphorylation of p38 MAPK.<newchar><newabs>14516736<newchar>The airway smooth muscle cell has a variety of properties, which confer on it the ability to participate actively in the inflammatory process and the remodeling events, which accompany severe, persistent asthma. Among these properties is its relationship to the extracellular matrix (ECM) with which it interacts by releasing matrix proteins, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs). Muscle cells derived from asthmatic subjects proliferate faster, release a different profile of matrix proteins, produce more connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in response to TGFbeta stimulation and these changes may impact on airway smooth muscle contraction and proliferation. Integrins on the surface of the airway smooth muscle transduce signals between the muscle cell and the ECM, but whether the expression and/or function of these is altered in asthma is not known. It is unlikely that current therapy is effective in preventing or reversing remodeling, and therefore, understanding the pathophysiological events, which underlie its mechanism is critical.<newchar><newabs>12843629<newchar>To clarify the mechanism of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in bovine endometrium, we investigated the regulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3 (TIMP-3) in bovine endometrial stromal cells (BESCs) on type-I collagen gel. When BESCs were seeded onto the center of collagen gel placed in culture dishes, the cells proliferated and formed multiple cell layers after 2 weeks. Under this culture condition, the production of progelatinase B/promatrix metalloproteinase (proMMP)-9 was augmented, which was not occurred with monolayered BESCs on plastic dishes. The mRNA expression of progelatinase A/proMMP-2 was not changed, but proMMP-2 activation was augmented. Furthermore, the level of prostromelysin-1/proMMP-3 mRNA was decreased, whereas the gene expression of TIMP-3 tended to increase in BESCs cultured on collagen gel. When BESCs cultured on collagen gel were treated with transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), the levels of proMMP-9 in the medium and TIMP-3 mRNA were augmented, but the mRNA expression of proMMP-3 was further suppressed. However, the expression and activation of proMMP-2 were not changed by TGF-beta1 in BESCs cultured on either plastic or collagen-gel dishes. These results suggest that the expression of MMPs-2, 3 and 9 and TIMP-3 is likely to be discoordinately regulated due to interaction with collagen and/or TGF-beta1 in bovine endometrium, and thereby different sets of MMPs may be associated with ECM remodeling during implantation and placentation in vivo.<newchar><newabs>14729404<newchar>We previously found that male mice with myocardial infarction (MI) had a high rate of cardiac rupture, which generally occurred at 3 to 5 days after MI. Since matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an important role in infarct healing, tissue repair and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling post-MI, we studied the temporal relationship of MMP expression and inflammatory response to cardiac rupture after acute MI. Male C57BL/6J mice were subjected to MI (induced by ligating the left anterior descending coronary artery) and killed 1, 2, 4, 7 or 14 days after MI. MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity in the heart were measured by zymography. Collagen content was measured by hydroxyproline assay. We found that after MI, MMP-9 activity increased as early as 1 day and reached a maximum by 2-4 days, associated with a similar increase in neutrophil and macrophage infiltration in the infarct area. MMP-2 started to increase rapidly within 4 days, reaching a maximum by 7 days and remaining high even at 14 days. Intense macrophage infiltration appeared by 4 days after MI and then gradually decreased within 7 to 14 days. Collagen content was unchanged until 4 days after MI, at which point it increased and remained high thereafter. Our data suggest that in mice, overexpression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 (possibly expressed mainly by neutrophils and macrophages) may lead to excessive ECM degradation in the early phase of MI, impairing infarct healing and aggravating early remodeling which in turn causes cardiac rupture.<newchar><newabs>12647301<newchar>The plasminogen/plasmin system is involved in vascular wall remodeling after injury, through extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and proteinase activation. Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) synthesize various components of the plasminogen/plasmin system. We investigated the conversion of plasminogen into plasmin in primary cultured rat VSMCs. VSMCs efficiently converted exogenous plasminogen into plasmin in a time- and dose-dependent manner. We measured plasmin activity by monitoring the hydrolysis of Tosyl-G-P-R-Mca, a fluorogenic substrate of plasmin. Cell-mediated plasmin activation was associated with the degradation of ECM, as revealed by fibronectin proteolysis. Plasmin also activated a proteinase able to hydrolyze Mca-P-L-G-L-Dpa-A-R-NH(2), a fluorogenic substrate of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). However, this proteinase was not inhibited by an MMP inhibitor. Furthermore, this proteinase displayed similar biochemical and pharmacological properties to fibronectin-proteinase, a recently identified zinc-dependent metalloproteinase located in the gelatin-binding domain of fibronectin. These results show that VSMCs convert exogenous plasminogen into plasmin in their pericellular environment. By hydrolyzing matrix protein plasmin activates a latent metalloproteinase that differs from MMP, fibronectin-proteinase. This metalloproteinase may participate to vascular wall remodeling, in concert with other proteinases.<newchar><newabs>11241738<newchar>Glaucomatous optic neuropathy is a common blinding disease characterized by remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and loss of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons at the level of the optic nerve head (ONH). Astrocytes, the major cell type in ONH, may participate in this process by production of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs). In normal and glaucomatous ONH, we detected MMP and TIMP expression by immunohistochemistry. Cultured astrocytes were used to characterize expression of MMPs and TIMPs by zymography, Western blot, and RNase protection assay. MMP production was stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Astrocytes expressed MMP1, MT1-MMP, MMP2, TIMP1, and TIMP2 in normal and glaucomatous ONH. MMP2, TIMP1, and TIMP2 localized to RGCs and their axons. Increased MMP1 and MT1-MMP expression was demonstrated in glaucoma. Cultured astrocytes constitutively expressed MMP2, MT1-MMP, TIMP1, and TIMP2, whereas MMP3, MMP7, MMP9, and MMP12 were not detectable in tissues or in cultured astrocytes. Our findings demonstrate the presence of specific MMPs and TIMPs in the ONH that may participate in the homeostasis and remodeling of the ECM in glaucoma. Expression of the same MMPs and TIMPs in cultured ONH astrocytes will allow further studies on the mechanisms regulating these enzymes.<newchar><newabs>11092396<newchar>During osteogenesis, in vitro, of tibial-derived rat osteoblasts (ROB) and derived clones, changes occur in the interactions of mature osteoblasts with the endogenous extracellular matrix (ECM) and these culminate in the formation of tridimensional nodules, which become sites of mineral deposition. We investigated if these changes might be mediated by remodeling of ECM, and we focused our study on the neutral metalloproteinases (MMPs), known agents of matrix remodeling, and on their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs). We report that during in vitro differentiation, osteoblasts express the secreted MMP-2 and -9 and the membrane gelatinase MMP-14. These, along with the tissue inhibitors TIMP-1 and -2, are developmentally regulated according to the maturation stage of osteoblasts. Their levels change in a similar association with osteoblast phenotypic maturation in different populations of ROB, which take different times to complete osteogenesis in vitro. MMP-14 expression coincides in both cell populations with the mature osteoblastic phenotype and is localized in the cells forming nodules. MMP-2 and -9 are expressed diffusely in the osteoblast population. Developmentally associated changes in the activation of MMP-2 are detected, associated in their timing with the expression of MMP-14 in both populations of ROB, and MMP-14 activates pro-MMP-2 in vitro. Expression of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for the three MMPs increases up to the time of nodule formation. At this stage, TIMP-1 mRNA levels are lowest. TIMP-2 mRNA decreases throughout osteogenesis. In situ hybridization in 7-day-old rat tibias shows the strongest expression of MMP-14 among osteogenic cells, in lining osteoblasts on the newly formed trabeculae under the growth plate, and on the endosteal surface of cortical bone. Our data support the concept that the developmentally regulated expression of MMP-14 triggers localized proteolysis within the osteogenic population, concomitant in vitro to nodule formation.<newchar><newabs>11948682<newchar>In many remodeling tissues, such as the heart, collagen degradation to provide new integrin-binding sites is required for survival. However, complete loss of integrin signaling due to disconnection from extracellular matrix (ECM) leads to apoptosis and dilatation. To test the hypothesis that a mutation in type I collagen gene induces cardiomyopathy, we employed a metalloproteinase-resistant collagen mutant homozygous transgenic male (B6,129-Colla-1) and compared with age-sex matched wildtype C57BL/J6 control mice. At the age of 38-42 weeks, aortic and left ventricle (LV) pressure were measured. The LV wall thickness and diameter were measured by a digital micrometer. The levels of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity and cardiospecific tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP-4) were measured by zymography and Western blot analyses, respectively. The levels of collagenolysis were measured by Western blot using anti-collagen antibody. In transgenic and wildtype mice, end-diastolic pressure (EDP) was 8.3 +/- 1.7 and 6.5 +/- 1.1 mmHg; LV diameter was 3.43 +/- 0.07 and 2.94 +/- 0.05 mm; wall thickness was 1.18 +/- 0.03 and 1.28 +/- 0.04 mm; end-diastolic wall stress was 600 +/- 158 and 347 +/- 49 dynes/cm(2), respectively. The increase in LV wall stress was associated with increased MMP-2 activity, increased collagenolysis, and decreased levels of TIMP-4. This leads to reduced elastic compliance in collagen mutant transgenic mice. The occurrence of cardiomyopathy in adult Colla-1 mice may be a significant confounding factor as it may be indicative of increased basal levels of ECM disruption. This phenotype is what would be expected if collagen degradation normally supplies integrin ligands during cardiac muscle remodeling.<newchar><newabs>18045155<newchar>Although cardiac synchronization is important in maintaining myocardial performance, the mechanism of dys-synchronization in ailing to failing myocardium is unclear. It is known that the cardiac myocyte contracts and relaxes individually; however, it synchronizes only when connected to one another by low resistance communications called gap junction protein (connexins) and extra cellular matrix (ECM). Therefore, the remodeling of connexins and ECM in heart failure plays an important role in cardiac conduction, synchronization and arrhythmias. This review for the first time addresses the role of systemic accumulation of homocysteine (Hcy) in vasospasm, pressure and volume overload heart failure, hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias. The attenuation of calcium-dependent mitochondrial (mt), endothelial and neuronal nitric oxide synthase (mtNOS, eNOS and nNOS) by Hcy plays a significant role in cardiac arrhythmias. The signal transduction mechanisms in Hcy-induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation in cardiac connexin remodeling are discussed.<newchar><newabs>18394422<newchar>Articular cartilage function depends on the molecular composition and structure of its extracellular matrix (ECM). The collagen network (CN) provides cartilage with tensile integrity, but must also remodel during growth. Such remodeling may depend on matrix molecules interacting with the CN to modulate the tensile behavior of cartilage. The objective of this study was to determine the effects of increasingly selective matrix depletion on tensile properties of immature and mature articular cartilage, and thereby establish a framework for identifying molecules involved in CN remodeling. Depletion of immature cartilage with guanidine, chondroitinase ABC, chondroitinase AC, and Streptomyces hyaluronidase markedly increased tensile integrity, while the integrity of mature cartilage remained unaltered after depletion with guanidine. The enhanced tensile integrity after matrix depletion suggests that certain ECM components of immature matrix serve to inhibit CN interactions and may act as modulators of physiological alterations of cartilage geometry and tensile properties during growth/maturation.<newchar><newabs>17487380<newchar>Metastatic progression is the cause of most cancer deaths. Host tumour cell separation (fission) is accompanied by simultaneous acquisition of migrating capability of cancer cells, remodeling of cellular architecture and effective 'homing' in body host environment. Cell remodeling involves cytoskeletal protein-protein and lipid-protein interaction together with altered signaling. Alteration of signaling in tumour cells may affect expression of many genes also by DNA-methylation/demethylation. This would alter the steady-state intracellular level of structural proteins or metabolic enzymes, and notably enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of lipids, affecting the composition of membranes. Lipid rafts are small, heterogeneous, highly dynamic, sterol- and sphingolipid-enriched domains that compartmentalize cellular processes. Small rafts can be stabilized to form larger platforms through protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions. Lipid rafts play an important role in intracellular protein transport, membrane fusion and trans-cytosis, also being platforms for cell surface antigens and adhesion molecules which are crucial for cell activation, polarization and signaling. Detachment of individual tumour cells from the host tumour lump requires lipid-protein-lipid raft (LPLR) reordering. Lipid rafts are also involved in angiogenesis and local invasion, which occurs within the host tumour vicinity by exchange of enzymes, cytokines and motility factors that modify the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Many cell surface adhesion, ECM, and signaling proteins (such as E-cadherin, catenin, CD44, MMP-9 and caveolin-1) are known to be absent or reduced following gene promoter-CpG-island hypermethylation in mid-stage growing tumours, but re-expressed (by gene promoter-mCpG-DNA demethylation) in carcinomas such as metastasized lung, prostate and sarcomas. The recent research acquisitions on lipid rafts have tremendous implications in understanding the genetic and biochemical bases of metastatic diffusion of cancer.<newchar><newabs>16995786<newchar>Matrix remodeling, which involves proteolytic enzymes, such as the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), is of significant importance with respect to tissue engineering a heart valve construct. The ability of valve interstitial cells (ICs) to release these enzymes in biological scaffolds and to synthesize their own matrix has not been adequately studied, and this has important implications for tissue engineering. Cultured human aortic valve ICs were seeded onto a 3-dimensional type I collagen matrix for 28 days, whereby the presence of the remodeling enzymes, MMPs, were determined using immunohistochemistry, and detection of extracellular matrix (ECM) gene expression was performed using in situ hybridization. The collagenases, stromelysins, and membrane-type MMPs were expressed in 1%, 2%, and 5% collagen scaffolds after 28 days, whereas gelatinase expression was not observed. In situ hybridization revealed the presence of the ECM messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) in cells cultured in collagen scaffolds however, an increase in all three mRNAs was only detected in the 1% collagen scaffolds. The presence of collagenases, stromelysins, and membrane-type MMPs indicate that human valve ICs have the capacity to remodel type I collagen scaffold and that the genes necessary for synthesizing matrix have been turned on within the cells themselves. Scaffold composition also demonstrated differential effects onMMPexpression. These observations are of relevance with respect to the development of tissue-engineered heart valves.<newchar><newabs>18424623<newchar>Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) is a ligand for the EGF receptor (EGFR). EGFR activation is associated with fibroproliferative processes in human lung disease and animal models of pulmonary fibrosis. We determined the effects of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib (Iressa) and erlotinib (Tarceva) on the development and progression of TGF-alpha-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Using a doxycycline-regulatable transgenic mouse model of lung-specific TGF-alpha expression, we determined effects of treatment with gefitinib and erlotinib on changes in lung histology, total lung collagen, pulmonary mechanics, pulmonary hypertension, and expression of genes associated with synthesis of ECM and vascular remodeling. Induction in the lung of TGF-alpha caused progressive pulmonary fibrosis over an 8-wk period. Daily administration of gefitinib or erlotinib prevented development of fibrosis, reduced accumulation of total lung collagen, prevented weight loss, and prevented changes in pulmonary mechanics. Treatment of mice with gefitinib 4 wk after the induction of TGF-alpha prevented further increases in and partially reversed total collagen levels and changes in pulmonary mechanics and pulmonary hypertension. Increases in expression of genes associated with synthesis of ECM as well as decreases of genes associated with vascular remodeling were also prevented or partially reversed. Administration of gefitinib or erlotinib did not cause interstitial fibrosis or increases in lavage cell counts. Administration of small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors prevented further increases in and partially reversed pulmonary fibrosis induced directly by EGFR activation without inducing inflammatory cell influx or additional lung injury.<newchar><newabs>15780176<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) stromelysin-3 (ST3) has long been implicated to play an important role in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and cell fate determination during normal and pathological processes. However, like other MMPs, the molecular basis of ST3 function in vivo remains unclear due to the lack of information on its physiological substrates. Furthermore, ST3 has only weak activities toward all tested ECM proteins. Using thyroid hormone-dependent Xenopus laevis metamorphosis as a model, we demonstrated previously that ST3 is important for apoptosis and tissue morphogenesis during intestinal remodeling. Here, we used yeast two-hybrid screen with mRNAs from metamorphosing tadpoles to identify potential substrate of ST3 during development. We thus isolated the 37 kd laminin receptor precursor (LR). We showed that LR binds to ST3 in vitro and can be cleaved by ST3 at two sites, distinct from where other MMPs cleave. Through peptide sequencing, we determined that the two cleavage sites are in the extracellular domain between the transmembrane domain and laminin binding sequence. Furthermore, we demonstrated that these cleavage sites are conserved in human LR. These results together with high levels of human LR and ST3 expression in carcinomas suggest that LR is a likely in vivo substrate of ST3 and that its cleavage by ST3 may alter cell-extracellular matrix interaction, thus, playing a role in mediating the effects of ST3 on cell fate and behavior observed during development and pathogenesis.<newchar><newabs>17565550<newchar>Maintenance and repair of corneal stromal extracellular matrix (ECM) requires a tightly coordinated balance of ECM synthesis, degradation and remodeling in which proteolytic enzymes (proteinases) perform important functions. There are natural proteinase inhibitors present in preocular tear film (PTF) and cornea simultaneously with proteinases that prevent excessive degradation of normal healthy tissue. Disorders occur when there is an imbalance between proteinases and proteinase inhibitors in favor of the proteinases, causing pathologic degradation of stromal collagen and proteoglycans in the cornea. Two matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-2 and MMP-9, are of major importance in terms of remodeling and degradation of the corneal stromal collagen. Immunohistochemical studies have shown different origins of MMP-2 and -9. MMP-2 is synthesized by corneal keratocytes and performs a surveillance function in the normal cornea, becoming locally activated to degrade collagen molecules that occasionally become damaged. Alternatively, MMP-9 may be produced by epithelial cells and polymorphonuclear neutrophils following corneal wounding. Because the cornea is in close contact with the preocular tear film (PTF), proteinases have been evaluated in the PTF. In damaged corneas, total proteolytic activity in the tear fluid was found to be significantly increased compared to normal eyes and contralateral eyes. Studies analyzing the proteolytic activity in serial PTF samples during corneal healing led to the following conclusions: ulcerative keratitis in animals is associated with initially high levels of tear film proteolytic activity, which decrease as ulcers heal; proteinase levels in melting ulcers remain elevated leading to rapid progression of the ulcers. The success of medical and surgical treatment of the corneal ulcers is reflected by the proteolytic activity in tears. In animals, successful treatment leads to a rapid reduction in tear film proteolytic activity that corresponds with the improvement in the clinical signs of corneal ulceration. The in vitro effects of various compounds on proteolytic activity in the tear fluid of animals with ulcerative keratitis have been evaluated and their important inhibitory effects have been confirmed. Because these various compounds utilize different mechanisms to inhibit various families of proteinases, a combination of these proteinase inhibitors may be beneficial.<newchar><newabs>10430752<newchar>Increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the airway wall contributes to the airway wall remodeling observed in asthmatics. Although alterations in collagen have been well described, less is known about changes in other components of the ECM, particularly proteoglycans (PGs). Endobronchial biopsies were obtained from seven patients with mild atopic asthma and six normal control subjects. Tissues were blocked in OCT and frozen in isopentane. Sections were immunostained with antibodies for the small leucine-rich PGs, lumican, biglycan, decorin, and fibromodulin and for versican, a large chondroitin sulfate PG. We calculated the area of positive staining in the subepithelial layer, correcting for basement membrane length. Lumican, biglycan, and versican were localized predominantly in the subepithelial layer of the airway wall in all groups. PG deposition was significantly increased in asthmatics as compared with that in control subjects. Furthermore, the degree of PG immunoreactivity was significantly correlated with airway responsiveness in the asthmatics (lumican; r = -0.77, p &lt; 0.05; biglycan: r = -0.76, p &lt; 0.05; versican: r = -0.74, p = 0.06). Our results suggest that PGs may play a role in airway wall remodeling and thereby, airway mechanics in asthma.<newchar><newabs>17100635<newchar>Adverse extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling contributes to fibrotic disorders in the kidney, lung, and heart. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key enzymes regulating ECM turnover, and MMP inhibition attenuates remodeling. Recent technological developments allow MMP-substrate relationships to be identified and explored as novel therapeutic targets. This review summarizes current and novel strategies to block MMP activity.<newchar><newabs>18346582<newchar>Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a mitogenic, angiogenic, and potent mediator of vascular permeability. It plays a role in injuries, contributes to edema during the acute stage of tissue damage, and promotes repair during recovery. We recently showed that VEGF serum levels of burn patients with a considerable number of damaged vessels were significantly increased. Here, we study the effects of VEGF on healthy vessels treated with a comparable VEGF concentration achieved in patients suffering heavy burns. VEGF 165 (0.2 mL of 10 ng/mL) or vehicle (saline 0.9%) was intraluminally applied to umbilical arteries for 90 min at 37 degrees C. Then, the cord was perfused for 4 hr. During perfusion, functional and biochemical parameters were kept within normal physiological ranges. Afterward, the vessels were analyzed applying morphometry, sirius red staining, polarization microscopy, Western blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry. Moreover, cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were treated with VEGF or vehicle for 90 min and 5.5 hr to examine extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and receptor tyrosine kinases. VEGF-treated umbilical arteries showed significant tissue edema and simultaneously an enhancement of laminin and collagen types I, III, and IV compared with control arteries. We detected an increase in Flt-1, Flk-1, osteopontin, and ss(1)-integrin. VEGF induced laminin early in HUVECs as measured by flow cytometry. In parallel, VEGF induced a higher amount of osteopontin, ss(1)-integrin, and both receptor tyrosine kinases in endothelial cells within 90 min. Intraluminal application of VEGF enhances ECM protein, osteopontin, and ss(1)-integrin production of the endothelium, while it still generates tissue edema. VEGF initiates vascular remodeling as early as it generates edema, even if the target vessel is not damaged. Osteopontin and ss(1)-integrin, both induced by VEGF, may play an important role in the vascular remodeling process.<newchar><newabs>17369286<newchar>Elucidating the mechanisms and factors regulating multimerization is biologically important in order to modulate the biological activities of functional proteins, especially adhesive proteins in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Vitronectin (VN) is a multifunctional glycoprotein present in plasma and ECM. Linkage of cellular adhesion and fibrinolysis by VN plays an essential role during tissue remodeling. Our previous study determined that the collagen-binding activity of VN was markedly enhanced with the decreased glycosylation during liver regeneration. This study demonstrated how alternations of glycans modulate the biological activity of VN. Human and rat VNs were used because of their similarities in structure and activities. The binding affinity of human VN to immobilized collagen was shown to be higher at pH 4.5 than at 7.5, at 37 degrees C than at 4 degrees C. Sedimentation velocity studies indicated that the greater the multimerization of human VN, the better it bound to collagen. The results indicate that the collagen binding of VN was modulated through its multimerization. Stepwise trimming of glycan with various exoglycosidases increased both the multimer size and the collagen binding of human VN, indicating that they are modulated by changes in glycosylation. The multimer sizes of VN purified from plasma of partially hepatectomized (PH) rats and sham-operated (SH) rats increased by about 45 and 31%, respectively, compared with those of nonoperated (NO) rats. In accordance with this, PH-VN exhibited remarkably enhanced collagen binding than SH-VN and NO-VN on surface plasmon resonance. In the PH rat sera, the multimer VN was increased in both amount and size compared with those in SH- and NO-sera. The results demonstrate that glycan alterations during tissue remodeling induce increased multimerization state to enhance the biological activity of VN.<newchar><newabs>17654707<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in development and/or pathogenesis through degrading extracellular matrix (ECM) components. We have previously shown that Xenopus MMP-9 gene is duplicated. To assess possible roles of MMP-9 and MMP-9TH in X. laevis intestinal remodeling, we here analyzed their expression profiles by in situ hybridization and show that their expression is transiently up-regulated during thyroid hormone-dependent metamorphosis. Of interest, MMP-9TH mRNA is strictly localized in the connective tissue and most highly expressed just beneath the larval epithelium that begins to undergo apoptosis. On the other hand, cells expressing MMP-9 mRNA become first detectable in the connective tissue and then, after the start of epithelial apoptosis, also in the larval epithelium. These results strongly suggest that MMP-9TH is responsible in the larval epithelial apoptosis through degrading ECM components in the basal lamina, whereas MMP-9 is involved in the removal of dying epithelial cells during amphibian intestinal remodeling.<newchar><newabs>16019990<newchar>The lung is affected by a variety of disease processes that can lead to considerable morbidity and mortality. As the lung is the only organ for respiration and gas exchange, the structural and functional integrity of the lung is of primary importance. Various pathological processes affect the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the lung in an adverse manner, causing destruction of tissue integrity followed by tissue remodeling, which together impair normal pulmonary function. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are neutral proteinases that are involved in the breakdown and remodeling of the ECM under a variety of physiological and pathological conditions. MMP-2 and MMP-9, collectively known as the gelatinases, are particularly important in the pathogenesis of inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic diseases in many organs including the lung. This review examines the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in disease of the lung and discusses the role these gelatinases may play in disease progression.<newchar><newabs>19355880<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-endopeptidases responsible for degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) components including basement membrane collagen, interstitial collagen, fibronectin, and various proteoglycans, during normal remodeling and repair processes. The turnover and remodeling of ECM must be tightly regulated since excessive or inappropriate expression of MMPs may contribute to the pathogenesis of tissue destructive processes associated with lung inflammation and disease. Despite the fact that our knowledge in the field of MMP biology is rapidly expanding, the role of MMPs in the pathogenesis of lung diseases is still not clear. The aim of the present review is to present the basic principles of MMP biology and, subsequently, to focus on the clinical and experimental evidence related to MMP activity in various lung disorders, including lung cancer, pleural effusions, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, acute respiratory distress syndrome and interstitial lung diseases.<newchar><newabs>10950114<newchar>Galectin-1 and galectin-3 have important functions in cell-cell interactions, cell adhesion to extracellular matrix, the organization of extracellular matrix, and tissue remodeling. To assess their potential role in chronic pancreatitis (CP), we examined their expression by Northern blot analysis, in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and Western blot analysis in normal and CP pancreatic tissues. Northern blot analysis revealed a 4.5-fold increase of galectin-1 mRNA (p &lt; 0.01) and a 3.8-fold increase of galectin-3 mRNA (p &lt; 0.01) in CP samples compared with normal controls. In situ hybridization analysis of normal pancreas indicated low abundance of galectin-1 mRNA in fibroblasts, whereas galectin-3 mRNA was moderately present in ductal cells. CP samples exhibited moderate to intense galectin-1 mRNA signals in fibroblasts, whereas galectin-3 mRNA signals were intense in the cells of ductular complexes and weak in the degenerating acinar cells. In addition, intense galectin-1 and galectin-3 mRNA signals were present in nerves of normal and CP samples. Immunohistochemistry showed a distribution pattern of galectin-1 and galectin-3 similar to that described for in situ hybridization. Relative quantification of galectin-1 and galectin-3 protein by immunoblotting revealed an increase of 3.2-fold and 3.0-fold, respectively, in CP compared with normal controls. There was a significant correlation between galectin-1 and fibrosis and between galectin-3 and fibrosis and the density of ductular complexes. Up-regulation of galectin-1 in fibroblasts and galectin-3 in ductular complexes suggests a role of these lectins in tissue remodeling in CP. Galectin-1 might participate in ECM changes, whereas galectin-3 seems to be involved in both ECM changes and ductular complex formation.<newchar><newabs>16285256<newchar>Tissue engineering of blood vessels offers a potential new therapy for patients with vascular occlusive disease. In addition, tissue engineering technologies offer the opportunity to study the biology of vascular cells in a biomimetic, three-dimensional environment. A model for vascular tissue engineering was used to study the effects of vascular cell age on extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, cellular mitosis, and protein synthesis under controlled conditions in vitro. Blood vessels were grown using a three-dimensional polyglycolic acid (PGA) mesh that was seeded with either infant or adult porcine vascular smooth muscle cells. Mechanical forces in the form of pulsatile radial distension were applied for the duration of the 7-week growth period. Overall, infant cells exhibited higher levels of cellular proliferation, ECM deposition, and remodeling activity than cells derived from adult animals. In addition, vessels cultured from infant cells had enhanced physical properties compared to vessels cultured from adult cells. The differentiation state of the smooth muscle cells in the infant and adult constructs was unchanged from the native state. However, the levels of immature pro-collagen, although undetectable in the vessels grown from adult cells, were similar in native vessels and in vessels grown with infant cells. These studies have important implications for the study of aging and vascular disease and remodeling, as well as for the field of tissue engineering.<newchar><newabs>16403942<newchar>Tissue remodeling is an important process in many inflammatory and fibrotic lung disorders. RBC may in these conditions interact with extracellular matrix (ECM). Fibroblasts can produce and secrete matrix components, matrix-degrading enzymes (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Imbalance in matrix synthesis/degradation may result in rearrangement of tissue architecture and lead to diseases such as emphysema or fibrosis. Neutrophil elastase (NE), a protease released by neutrophils, is known to activate MMP. We hypothesized that RBC can stimulate secretion of MMPs from human lung fibroblasts and that NE can augment this effect. Human fetal lung fibroblasts were cultured in floating collagen gels with or without RBC. After 4 days, the culture medium was analyzed with gelatin zymography, Western blot, and ELISA for MMP-1, -2, -3 and TIMP-1, -2. RBC augmented NE-induced fibroblast-mediated collagen gel contraction compared with NE alone (18.4+/-1.6%, 23.7+/-1.4% of initial gel area, respectively). A pan-MMP inhibitor (GM-6001) completely abolished the stimulating effect of NE. Gelatin zymography showed that RBC stimulated MMP-2 activity and that NE enhanced conversion to the active form. Addition of GM-6001 completely inhibited MMP-2 activity in controls, whereas it only partially altered RBC-induced MMP activity. Western blot confirmed the presence of MMP-1 and MMP-3 in fibroblasts stimulated with RBC, and ELISA confirmed increased concentrations of pro-MMP-1. We conclude that stimulation of MMP secretion by fibroblasts may explain the ability of RBC to augment fibroblast-mediated collagen gel contraction. This might be a potential mechanism by which hemorrhage in inflammatory conditions leads to ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>15944944<newchar>Chronic C hepatitis represents a major health problem worldwide, mainly because progression of the tissue damage leads to the development of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. In this review we discuss the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of liver fibrosis. In particular we consider some immunologic aspects that regulate the interaction between HCV and the host immune defense. Reflections are made about the roles played by the host capacity to respond to the viral infection during therapy and the consequences of the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins leading to the development of fibrosis. The involvement of inflammatory cytokines in regulating the proteolytic remodeling of the liver and the ECM turn-over is essential for the activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), that have an important role in the progression of liver fibrosis. Finally, we analyze one of the aspects involved in the activation of the HSCs, namely the proteolytic remodeling of the surrounding environment.<newchar><newabs>15128599<newchar>Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) occurs during antral follicle growth, and the plasminogen activators (PA) have been implicated in this process in rodents. In the present study, we measured the expression and secretion of PA and the PA inhibitor protease nexin-1 (SerpinE2) in antral and basal bovine granulosa cells from small (&lt;6 mm), medium (6-8 mm), and large follicles (&gt;8 mm) during 6 days of culture in serum-free medium. Casein zymography revealed that the cells secreted predominantly tissue-type PA (tPA) with urokinase (uPA) being associated mainly with cell lysates, and Western blot demonstrated that the cells secreted SerpinE2. Overall, secreted tPA activity was higher in cultures of cells from small follicles compared with large follicles, and secreted SerpinE2 levels were higher in cultures of cells from large follicles. In cultures of cells from small follicles, secreted tPA levels increased with time of culture for antral but not basal cells, and SerpinE2 levels increased with time for basal but not antral cells. In cultures of granulosa cells from large follicles, tPA activity increased significantly with time of culture, whereas SerpinE2 levels decreased. Cell-associated uPA activity decreased with time in cells from medium and large follicles. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and Northern blot analysis showed that SerpinE2 secretion was regulated largely at the transcriptional level, whereas tPA secretion was not. The data suggest stage-dependent regulation of granulosa cell PA and SerpinE2 production, consistent with a role in ECM remodeling during follicle growth.<newchar><newabs>12927975<newchar>In this study, we investigated the effect of inflammatory cytokines on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-1) and TIMP-1 production in human dermal fibroblasts, which play a pivotal role in wound healing, ranging from the synthesis and remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) to the synthesis of growth factors. The balance of MMPs and TIMPs is crucial in directing successful wound repair. Human adult dermal fibroblasts were seeded in six well plates (7.5 x 10(4) cells/ml) in complete media. Eighty to ninety percent confluent cells were treated with interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) (10 ng/ml) for 6h in serum free media with suitable controls run in triplicate. Supernatants were assayed for pro-MMP-1 &amp; TIMP-1. Extracted total RNA was used for reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with sequence specific primers for MMP-1, TIMP-1 and beta-actin. Signal intensity was normalized to the internal control (beta-actin). Statistical analysis used ANOVA. MMP-1 and TIMP-1 mRNA expression were markedly increased with IL-6 and TNF-alpha treatment and remains unchanged with IL-1beta. Pro-MMP-1 protein levels are unchanged with TNF-alpha and significantly increased with IL-1beta and IL-6 treatment. However, TNF-alpha significantly increases TIMP-1 protein levels. Data suggests differential regulation of MMP-1 and TIMP-1 protein levels by the cytokines found in stimulated dermal fibroblasts. Further characterization of this response will provide an understanding of the mechanisms of pathogenesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) and the potential role of metalloproteinases in tissue remodeling after injury.<newchar><newabs>12714042<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) constitute a multigene family of over 23 secreted and cell-surface associated enzymes that cleave or degrade various pericellular substrates. In addition to virtually all extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds, their targets include other proteinases, chemotactic molecules, latent growth factors, growth factor-binding proteins and cell surface molecules. The MMP activity is controlled by the physiological tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs). There is much evidence that MMPs and their inhibitors play a key role during extracellular remodeling in physiological situations and in cancer progression. They have other functions that promoting tumor invasion. Indeed, they regulate early stages of tumor progression such as tumor growth and angiogenesis. Membrane type MMPs (MT-MMPs) constitute a new subset of cell surface-associated MMPs. The present review will focus on MT1-MMP which plays a major role at least, in the ECM remodeling, directly by degrading several of its components, and indirectly by activating pro-MMP2. As our knowledge on the field of MT1-MMP biology has grown, the unforeseen complexities of this enzyme and its interaction with its inhibitor TIMP-2 have emerged, often revealing unexpected mechanisms of action.<newchar><newabs>12489160<newchar>Odontogenesis involves a complex series of processes including epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, morphogenesis, differentiation, fibrillogenesis, and mineralization. Extracellular (ECM) remodeling plays a critical role in the rapid morphological changes that accompany these events. It is proposed that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) participate in the remodeling of tooth-specific matrices that accompanies the developmental events. MMPs are zinc-requiring endopeptidases that are centrally involved in the controlled turnover of ECM components and are key to a varied range of developmental processes. Thus, the aim of this study was to examine the expression of MMPs 1, 2, 3, and 9 within the developing tooth germ of Wistar rats, using immunohistochemical localisation. During the bud stage, MMPs 1, 2, 3, and 9 were expressed within both epithelial and mesenchymal cells. Later on, during the cap stage, differential expression was observed; of note was the expression of MMP 3 within the enamel knot. This study reports the temperospatial expression of MMPs 1, 2, 3, and 9 during early tooth development, and points to them having a key role during this important developmental period.<newchar><newabs>14734792<newchar>Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 is the main inhibitor of the fibrinolytic system and is known to play an essential role in tissue remodeling. Recent evidence indicates that chronic asthma may lead to tissue remodeling such as subepithelial fibrosis and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the airways. However, the role of PAI-1 in asthma is unknown. Recently the mast cell (MC), which plays a major role in asthma, was found as a novel source of PAI-1, and a large number of MCs expressing PAI-1 are infiltrated in the airways of patients with severe asthma. Furthermore, PAI-1-deficient mice show reduced ECM deposition in the airways of a murine model of chronic asthma by inhibiting MMP-9 activity and fibrinolysis. In a human study, the 4G allele frequency was significantly higher in the asthmatic patients than in the control group. In view of the findings that the 4G allele is associated with elevated plasma PAI-1 level, elevated PAI-1 level in the lung may contribute to the development of asthma. In summary, PAI-1 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma and further studies evaluating the mechanisms of PAI-1 action may lead to the development of a novel therapeutic target for the treatment and prevention of asthma.<newchar><newabs>17496904<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important physiological feature of normal growth and development. Recent studies have emphasized the role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) in normal mouse nephrogenesis. We have demonstrated previously in the rat that in utero exposure to maternal diabetes impairs renal development leading to a 30% reduction in the nephron number. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) are known to mediate high glucose effects on matrix degradation. The aim of the present study was to address the expression of type IV collagenase and TGF-beta1/CTGF systems in rat kidney during normal development and after in utero exposure to maternal diabetes. Both MMP-2 and MMP-9 mRNA metanephric expressions and activities were dramatically downregulated in kidneys issued from diabetic fetuses and in metanephros cultured in the presence of high glucose concentration. TGF-beta1 and CTGF expressions were significantly enhanced in diabetic fetal kidneys and in high glucose cultured metanephroi. Conditioned media obtained from metanephroi grown with high glucose concentration upregulated functional TGF-beta activity in transfected ATDC5 cells. In conclusion, in impaired nephrogenesis resulting from in utero exposure to maternal diabetes, alteration of both type IV collagenase and TGF-beta1/CTGF systems may lead to abnormal remodeling of ECM, which may, in turn, induce defects in ureteral bud branching leading to the observed reduction in the nephron number with consequences later in life: progression of chronic renal disease and hypertension.<newchar><newabs>12370004<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a pivotal family of zinc enzymes responsible for degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) components including basement membrane collagen, interstitial collagen, fibronectin, and various proteoglycans, during normal remodeling and repair processes. The potent proteolytic activities of MMPs is mainly regulated by the balance with specific tissue inhibitors of Matrix metalloproteinases (TIMP). Excessive or inappropriate expression of MMP may contribute to the pathogenesis of tissue destructive processes in a wide variety of diseases including lung diseases. Although the precise mechanisms are still unknown, the contribution of individual MMPs are worth investigating in seeking the pathogenesis of various lung diseases such as lung cancer, bronchial asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, acute lung injury, pulmonary hypertension and interstitial lung diseases. In particular, the close association of each lung disease with the destructive effects of gelatinase A and B (also called MMP-2 and MMP-9) on the basement membrane in early alveolar remodeling, and that of collagenase-1 (MMP-1) on the major interstitial structural protein of ECM have received considerable attention. The interaction of MMPs with chemical mediators and inflammatory cytokines has also been reported in some recent studies. Several promising therapeutic approaches to inhibit MMPs have just started in the field of oncology, while more specific MMP inhibitors may be required for further investigation in other fields of lung diseases. In this review, the main focus is on the recent clinical and experimental findings and the contributions of MMPs and/or TIMPs in the lung diseases.<newchar><newabs>11174024<newchar>Patients undergoing long-term continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) sometimes experience ultrafiltration failure. Mesothelial basement membrane thickening and the accumulation of submesothelial fibrotic tissue are common features of the diseased peritoneum. Peritonitis can lead to ultrafiltration failure, but the precise mechanism is not clear. The key enzymes in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, namely matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), are produced by human peritoneal mesothelial cells. Using peritoneal effluent from 13 CAPD patients with peritonitis and 7 noninfected CAPD control individuals, we examined MMP and TIMP activities by gelatin and reverse zymography. Latent and activated types of MMP-2 and -9, and TIMP-1 and -2 were identified in peritoneal effluent (from all CAPD patients). Levels of latent and activated type MMP-9, as well as of TIMP-1 activities were higher at the onset of peritonitis than either during the recovery phase of peritonitis and/ or in control individuals. Activated MMP-9 activity positively correlated with leukocyte numbers and IL-6 levels in peritoneal effluent. Activities of MMP-2 and TIMP-2 in peritoneal effluent did not change between the onset of peritonitis and recovery. We concluded that increased MMP-9 and TIMP-1 levels might be associated with peritoneal ECM remodeling during peritonitis.<newchar><newabs>12175988<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is essential for normal development and tissue repair. Although many roles for extracellular proteinases in the breakdown of ECM have been established, the regulations of these proteinases in human tissue are not fully understood. Inflammatory cytokines have been implicated in the regulation of several matrix metalloproteinases. To determine whether these mediators have a similar effect on fibrinolysis and the remodeling of the fibrin provisional matrix, we examined the role of cytokines on the regulation of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) in human skin. In this report, we show that interleukin-8 (IL-8), but not other cytokines tested, is a potent inducer of the 38-kDa uPA in organ-cultured human skin. In addition, the uPA inhibitor, PAI-1, was not affected by IL-8. When primary epidermal human keratinocytes were treated with IL-8, 55-kDa pro-uPA was significantly induced in the conditioned medium. The mRNA expression of uPA in the keratinocytes was found to be constitutively elevated and was not affected by IL-8. To support such a notion, activation of the 5'-flanking promoter of the human uPA gene was measured using the CAT reporter assay. Consistent with the results of mRNA measurement, the promoter is constitutively active in keratinocytes and is not affected by IL-8. In contrast, the promoter construct is neither active in the dermal fibroblasts nor stimulated by the cytokine. This differential transactivation of uPA gene in these cells indicates that keratinocyte-specific factors may govern the basal expression of the gene. These results indicate a complex regulation of uPA expression in epidermal cells.<newchar><newabs>11706056<newchar>Trophoblast differentiation during the first trimester of pregnancy involves cell proliferation and invasion and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. Reports have indicated that, in a variety of cell types, processes such as proliferation, invasion, and ECM remodeling require the turnover of focal adhesions mediated by a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase named focal adhesion kinase (FAK). Therefore, in the present study we examined the expression and spatial localization of FAK during early human placental development. Immunocytochemical and immunoblot analysis showed that FAK and a focal adhesion-associated protein named paxillin were highly expressed between the 5th and 8th weeks of gestation, specifically in villous cytotrophoblast and extravillous trophoblast (EVT) cells. Activated FAK, phosphorylated on Tyr-397, colocalized with alpha5 integrin and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) expression in EVT cells within a previously characterized intermediate, invasive-restrained region. FAK and paxillin expression dramatically decreased after 10 to 12 weeks of gestation coincident with increasing pO(2) levels. Exposure of human villous explants of 5 to 8 weeks to a 3% O(2) environment resulted in increased trophoblast outgrowth, cell proliferation, and detection of alpha5 integrin and MMP2, as well as increased activation of FAK in EVT cells compared with explants grown in a 20% O(2) environment. To determine whether FAK was a key requisite for trophoblast differentiation, villous explants of 5 weeks gestation were grown in Matrigel in a 3% O(2) environment and incubated with 20-mer antisense FAK oligonucleotides. A dramatic reduction of trophoblast outgrowth was observed in antisense-treated explants compared with missense and control cultures, and, in addition, cell proliferation and MMP2 activity in antisense-treated explants were dramatically reduced. These data suggest that FAK is a key kinase involved in early trophoblast cell differentiation and plays a role in regulating cell proliferation and motility during early placental development.<newchar><newabs>10444506<newchar>In several cardiac disease states, alterations in myocyte and extracellular matrix (ECM) structure occur with left ventricular (LV) remodeling and are associated with changes in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. Although nonmyocyte cell types have been implicated as sites for synthesis and expression of MMPs within the ECM, whether the LV myocyte itself expresses specific types and active forms of MMPs remains unknown. Accordingly, isolated Ca(2+)-tolerant LV porcine myocytes (10(5) cells/ml) in which selective disaggregation and resuspension was performed (13 independent experiments) were plated on basement membrane substrates including Matrigel, collagen IV, laminin, and fibronectin as well as poly-L-lysine. After 24-h incubation, LV myocyte conditioned media were subjected to zymography, a specific MMP-2 proteolytic capture assay, immunoblotting, and ELISA for detection of MMP activity and relative content of the 72-kDa gelatinase MMP-2. Although robust zymographic activity [(pixels. mm(2))/cell] was observed in conditioned media from LV myocytes plated on collagen IV (1,673 +/- 297), fibronectin (1,530 +/- 281), and poly-L-lysine (2,545 +/- 560), proteolytic activity appeared to be lower in conditioned media from LV myocytes plated on Matrigel (842 +/- 83) and laminin (1,329 +/- 238). MMP-2 proteolytic activity was increased by approximately eightfold in conditioned media taken from LV myocytes plated on poly-L-lysine compared with that of Matrigel. With respect to each of the adhesion substrates, MMP-2 content was at least 50% lower in LV myocyte conditioned media taken from Matrigel and laminin. Immunofluorescent labeling of LV myocytes yielded a strong signal for MMP-2 within the myocyte and along the sarcolemmal surface. In conclusion, this study demonstrated for the first time that adult LV myocytes synthesize and express members of the MMP family and thus may potentially participate in the LV remodeling process through synthesis and secretion of MMPs.<newchar><newabs>19317336<newchar>Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airway. Pathological repair of chronic inflammation leads to airway remodeling. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), a profibrotic cytokine, plays an important role in promoting the structural changes of airway remodeling. TGF-beta effects on the proliferation, differentiation and extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism of airway structural cells. This study assessed serum TGF-beta1 in different severity of atopic asthma compared to non-atopic controls. Thirty-one atopic asthmatic patients and 34 non-atopic controls, aged 7-18 years, were recruited as to the asthma severity: steroid naïve mild asthma, moderate asthma, and asthma in remission. Serum TGF-beta1 was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. There was a significant difference between serum TGF-beta1 in asthmatic patients and that in control patients (39.59 ng/ml vs. 0.26 ng/ml, p &lt; 0.001). Serum TGF-beta1 was highest in steroid naïve mild asthma group when compared to the moderate asthma and asthma in remission groups (47.44 ng/ml vs. 38.64 ng/ml and 47.44 ng/ml vs. 35.94 ng/ml, p = 0.013 and 0.001, respectively). There were no correlations among serum TGF-beta1 and pulmonary function test parameters, duration of asthma, and duration of inhaled corticosteroid treatment. These data support the role of TGF-beta1 in airway remodeling in asthma.<newchar><newabs>12837632<newchar>The initial stages of central nervous system (CNS) myelination require complex interactions of oligodendrocytes with their surrounding extracellular environment. In the present study, we demonstrate that commencing with active myelination oligodendrocytes express phosphodiesterase-Ialpha/autotaxin [PD-Ialpha/ATX (NPP-2)] as a non-membrane-associated extracellular factor. As such a component of the extracellular environment, PD-Ialpha/ATX has the ability to antagonize the adhesive interactions between oligodendroglial cells and known extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules present in the developing CNS. This counteradhesion requires intracellular signaling through heterotrimeric G proteins on fibronectin substrates and thus represents an active cellular response. Similar counteradhesive effects in other systems have been attributed to the activity of matricellular proteins, which support intermediate stages of cell adhesion thought to facilitate cellular locomotion and remodeling. Thus, the release of PD-Ialpha/ATX may be critically involved in the regulation of the initial stages of myelination, i.e., oligodendrocyte remodeling, via modulation of oligodendrocyte-ECM interactions in a matricellular fashion.<newchar><newabs>16426591<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteolytic enzymes responsible for extracellular protein degradation in the cardiovascular system. Originally known to play pivotal roles in tissue morphogenesis and wound healing, they have been shown to participate in the complex remodeling processes in blood vessels and the myocardium. The biological activity of MMPs is regulated at different levels: (1) gene expression, (2) activation of precursor proenzyme forms by other MMPs or non-MMP proteins, including thrombin and plasmin, (3) complex formation with surface and extracellular matrix (ECM) components and (4) inhibition by endogenous tissue inhibitors of MMPs, the TIMPs. Murine models with gain or loss of gene function of different MMPs and TIMPS have provided a wealth of experimental data on their critical role in pathological conditions ranging from atherosclerosis, vascular injury, and restenosis to left ventricular function and structural remodeling following chronic pressure and volume overload and ischemia-reperfusion injury.<newchar><newabs>19479939<newchar>Heparan sulfate (HS) sugar chains attached to core proteoglycans (PGs) termed HSPGs mediate an extensive range of cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) and growth factor interactions based upon their sulfation patterns. When compared with non-osteogenic (maintenance media) culture conditions, under established osteogenic culture conditions, MC3T3-E1 cells characteristically increase their osteogenic gene expression profile and switch their dominant fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) from FGFR1 (0.5-fold decrease) to FGFR3 (1.5-fold increase). The change in FGFR expression profile of the osteogenic-committed cultures was reflected by their inability to sustain an FGF-2 stimulus, but respond to BMP-2 at day 14 of culture. The osteogenic cultures decreased their chondroitin and dermatan sulfate PGs (biglycan, decorin, and versican), but increased levels of the HS core protein gene expression, in particular glypican-3. Commitment and progress through osteogenesis is accompanied by changes in FGFR expression, decreased GAG initiation but increased N- and O-sulfation and reduced remodeling of the ECM (decreased heparanase expression) resulting in the production of homogenous (21 kDa) HS chain. With the HSPG glypican-3 expression strongly upregulated in these processes, siRNA was used to knockdown this gene to examine the effect on osteogenic commitment. Reduced glypican-3 abrogated the expression of Runx2, and thus differentiation. The reintroduction of this HSPG into Runx2-null cells allowed osteogenesis to proceed. These results demonstrate the dependence of osteogenesis on specific HS chains, in particular those associated with glypican-3.<newchar><newabs>12480812<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling after myocardial infarction (MI) is an important determinant of cardiac function. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and angiotensin (Ang) II levels increase after MI and both factors affect fibroblast functions. The type 1 (AT1) receptor that mediates most Ang II effects is upregulated after MI in cardiac fibroblasts, and there is evidence that this is caused by TNF-alpha. We sought to determine if TNF-alpha-induced AT1 receptor upregulation alters fibroblast responsiveness to Ang II and if this effect differs from direct TNF-alpha effects on fibroblast functions. In cultured neonatal rat cardiac fibroblasts, TNF-alpha reduced cellular [3H]-proline incorporation, increased matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity and protein, and increased TIMP-1 protein levels. In cardiac fibroblasts with TNF-alpha-induced AT1 receptor upregulation, Ang II-stimulated [3H]proline incorporation and TIMP-1 protein production was approximately 2-fold greater than in nonpretreated fibroblasts. Angiotensin II reduced MMP-2 activity and protein level only in TNF-alpha-pretreated fibroblasts. Angiotensin II effects were inhibited by selective AT1 (but not AT2) receptor blockers. Thus, TNF-alpha-induced AT1 receptor upregulation enhances Ang II-mediated functions that favor fibrosis. These effects are mostly directionally opposite of direct TNF-alpha effects on cardiac fibroblasts. Recognition of multifaceted TNF-alpha effects provides new insights into post-MI ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>10340464<newchar>Remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) is one of the key events in many developmental processes. In the present study, a temporal profile of gelatinase activities in regenerating salamander limbs was examined zymographically. In addition, the effect of retinoic acid (RA) on these enzyme activities was examined to relate the pattern-duplicating effect of RA in limb regenerates with gelatinase activities. During regeneration, various types of gelatinase activities were detected, and these activities were at their maximum levels at the dedifferentiation stage. Upon treatment with chelating agents EDTA and 1,10-phenanthroline, the enzyme activities were inhibited indicating that those enzymes are likely matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Considering the molecular sizes and the decrease of molecular sizes by treatment with p-aminophenylmercuric acetate, an artificial activator of proMMP, some of the gelatinases expressed during limb regeneration are presumed to be MMP-2 and MMP-9. In RA-treated regenerates, overall gelatinase activities increased, especially the MMP-2-like gelatinase activity which increased markedly. These results suggest that MMP-2-like and MMP-9-like gelatinases play a role in ECM remodeling during regeneration, and that gelatinases are involved in the excessive dedifferentiation after RA treatment.<newchar><newabs>17189319<newchar>Increased proinflammatory mediators and ECM deposition are key features of the airways in asthma. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are produced by airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells and have multiple roles in inflammation and tissue remodeling. We hypothesized that components of the asthmatic airway would stimulate MMP production and activation by ASM and contribute to airway remodeling. We measured human ASM-derived MMP mRNA, protein, and activity by real-time RT-PCR, zymography, Western blotting, and MMP activity assay. Collagen I and thrombin caused a synergistic increase in MMP-2 protein and total MMP activity but paradoxically decreased MMP-2 mRNA. Additionally, collagen I activated MMP-2 in culture supernatants independent of the cell surface. Together, collagen I and thrombin strongly enhanced MMP-14 mRNA and protein but had no effect individually, suggesting increased MMP-14, the activating protease for MMP-2, may be partially responsible for MMP-2 activation. Furthermore, collagen I reduced tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 protein (TIMP-2). We examined the role of MMPs in functions of ASM related to airway remodeling and found migration and proliferation were MMP dependent, whereas adhesion and apoptosis were not. Ilomastat inhibited migration by 25%, which was also inhibited by TIMPs 1-4 and increased by the MMP-2 activator thrombin. These in vitro findings suggest that the environment within the airways of patients with asthma enhances MMP-2 and -14 protein and activity by a complex interaction of transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms, which may contribute to ASM migration.<newchar><newabs>15607128<newchar>A survey of the available biological data on tryptase inhibitors suggests that there is considerable interest in tryptase as a therapeutic target particularly for the treatment of allergic asthma and inflammatory disorders. This interest was driven primarily by data from studies carried out on the cellular and in vivo actions of this serine protease over the past decade, all of which have suggested a pro-inflammatory role for tryptase. Tryptase beta is the form of interest in allergic asthma and the data from numerous studies have shown that tryptase cannot only contribute to airway bronchoconstriction and hyperresponsiveness, but may have a key role in fibrosis and ECM turnover, hallmarks of the remodeling process. Hence, inhibitors of tryptase have the potential to make an impact on fibrosis and airway wall remodelling. However, few studies, if any, have been carried out to determine the effect of tryptase inhibitors on airway remodeling and this is an area that warrants further investigation with the appropriate models because the eventual positioning of tryptase inhibitors in asthma therapy will be strengthened by data supporting an impact on airway remodeling in addition to effects on bronchial hyperresponsiveness. This review has focused on tryptase inhibitors in the pipeline and it is clear that with a few exceptions, the majority of these compounds are targeted for inhaled delivery. Finally, judging by the interest from numerous pharmaceutical companies, it appears the stage is set for tryptase inhibitors to make their mark as drugs of the future for allergic asthma and the results from clinical trials is awaited with eager anticipation.<newchar><newabs>19422655<newchar>Mechanical forces are essential for tissue homeostasis. In adherent cells, cell-matrix adhesions connect the extracellular matrix (ECM) with the cytoskeleton and transmit forces in both directions. Integrin receptors and signaling molecules in cell-matrix adhesions transduce mechanical into chemical signals, thereby regulating many cellular processes. This review focuses on how cellular mechanotransduction is tuned by actin-generated cytoskeletal tension that balances external with internal mechanical forces. We point out that the cytoskeleton rapidly responds to external forces by RhoA-dependent actin assembly and contraction. This in turn induces remodeling of cell-matrix adhesions and changes in cell shape and orientation. As a consequence, a cell constantly modulates its response to new bouts of external mechanical stimulation. Changes in actin dynamics are monitored by MAL/MKL-1/MRTF-A, a co-activator of serum response factor. Recent evidence suggests that MAL is also involved in coupling mechanically induced changes in the actin cytoskeleton to gene expression. Compared with other, more rapid and transient signals evoked at the cell surface, this parallel mechanotransduction pathway is more sustained and provides spatial and temporal specificity to the response. We describe examples of genes that are regulated by mechanical stress in a manner depending on actin dynamics, among them the ECM protein, tenascin-C.<newchar><newabs>15053182<newchar>Early infarct expansion is associated with progressive ventricular dilatation and contractile dysfunction, and heralds a poor long-term prognosis. The pathophysiology of ventricular remodeling leading to CHF is hypothesized to begin with infarct expansion, which causes increased stress in the myocardium adjacent to the infarct. Increased stress in normally perfused border zone myocardium results in the production of cytokines and ROS, which in turn stimulate myocyte apoptosis, disruption of the ECM, and fibrosis. The value of ventricular compressive therapy in established CHF with the Acorn CSD is unclear. Early clinical and laboratory studies indicate that the device can be placed safely using standard surgical techniques, and that constrictive physiology is surprisingly rare. In the few patients who have received the device, however, the clinical benefit has not been dramatic. A final assessment awaits a well-designed clinical trial comparing isolated CSD placement with optimal medical management, the primary end points being death or the need for organ replacement. In contrast, the value of early ventricular compressive therapy (ie, the prophylactic prevention of infarct expansion) has been demonstrated experimentally: early ventricular restraint dramatically ameliorates remodeling. This strategy probably represents the best application of ventricular compressive therapy. Future work must ascertain the best timing for such an intervention.<newchar><newabs>19958327<newchar>Definition of acute renal allograft rejection (AR) markers remains clinically relevant. Features of T-cell-mediated AR are tubulointerstitial and vascular inflammation associated with excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, regulated by metzincins, including matrix metalloproteases (MMP). Our study focused on expression of metzincins (METS), and metzincins and related genes (MARGS) in renal allograft biopsies using four independent microarray data sets. Our own cases included normal histology (N, n = 20), borderline changes (BL, n = 4), AR (n = 10) and AR + IF/TA (n = 7). MARGS enriched in all data sets were further examined on mRNA and/or protein level in additional patients. METS and MARGS differentiated AR from BL, AR + IF/TA and N in a principal component analysis. Their expression changes correlated to Banff t- and i-scores. Two AR classifiers, based on METS (including MMP7, TIMP1), or on MARGS were established in our own and validated in the three additional data sets. Thirteen MARGS were significantly enriched in AR patients of all data sets comprising MMP7, -9, TIMP1, -2, thrombospondin2 (THBS2) and fibrillin1. RT-PCR using microdissected glomeruli/tubuli confirmed MMP7, -9 and THBS2 microarray results; immunohistochemistry showed augmentation of MMP2, -9 and TIMP1 in AR. TIMP1 and THBS2 were enriched in AR patient serum. Therefore, differentially expressed METS and MARGS especially TIMP1, MMP7/-9 represent potential molecular AR markers.<newchar><newabs>15711638<newchar>MMPs are implicated in LV remodeling after acute myocardial infarction (MI). To analyze the role of MMP-2, we generated MI by ligating the left coronary artery of MMP-2-KO and WT mice, the latter of which were administered orally an MMP-2-selective inhibitor or vehicle (TISAM). The survival rate was significantly higher in MMP-2-KO and TISAM-treated mice than in control WT mice. The main cause of mortality in control WT mice was cardiac rupture, which was not observed in MMP-2-KO or TISAM-treated mice. Control WT mice, but not MMP-2-KO or TISAM-treated mice, showed activation of the zymogen of MMP-2, strong gelatinolytic activity, and degradation of ECM components, including laminin and fibronectin, in the infarcted myocardium. Although infarcted cardiomyocytes in control WT mice were rapidly removed by macrophages, the removal was suppressed in MMP-2-KO and TISAM-treated mice. Macrophage migration was induced by the infarcted myocardial tissue from control WT mice and was inhibited by treatment of macrophages with laminin or fibronectin peptides prior to migration assay. These data suggest that inhibition of MMP-2 activity improves the survival rate after acute MI by preventing cardiac rupture and delays post-MI remodeling through a reduction in macrophage infiltration.<newchar><newabs>19800625<newchar>Tissues lose mechanical integrity when our body is injured. To rapidly restore mechanical stability a multitude of cell types can jump into action by acquiring a reparative phenotype-the myofibroblast. Here, I review the known biomechanics of myofibroblast differentiation and action and speculate on underlying mechanisms. Hallmarks of the myofibroblast are secretion of extracellular matrix, development of adhesion structures with the substrate, and formation of contractile bundles composed of actin and myosin. These cytoskeletal features not only enable the myofibroblast to remodel and contract the extracellular matrix but to adapt its activity to changes in the mechanical microenvironment. Rapid repair comes at the cost of tissue contracture due to the inability of the myofibroblast to regenerate tissue. If contracture and ECM remodeling become progressive and manifests as organ fibrosis, the outcome of myofibroblast activity will have more severe consequences than the initial damage. Whereas the pathological consequences of myofibroblast occurrence are of great interest for physicians, their mechano-responsive features render them attractive for physicists and bioengineers. Their well developed cytoskeleton and responsiveness to a plethora of cytokines fascinate cell biologists and biochemists. Finally, the question of the myofibroblast origin intrigues stem cell biologists and developmental biologists-what else can you ask from a truly interdisciplinary cell?<newchar><newabs>19255800<newchar>Acute ischemia is a well-known inductor of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, which leads to the development of congestive heart failure and is associated with left ventricular dilatation. Here we investigate the timecourse of ECM processing with release of endostatin (ES) and other low-molecular-weight fragments during early ischemia-reperfusion of the heart. In this blinded study, 30 pigs were randomized to 60 min of global myocardial ischemia at either 4 or 37 degrees C or served as control. Five transmyocardial tissue samples were collected at baseline and after ischemia within 150 min of reperfusion. Collagen XVIII cleavage products of 10-75 kDa including ES (25 kDa) were analyzed using the Western blot and ELISA method, and creatin kinase as marker of myocardial injury was determined in samples collected from the coronary sinus. We demonstrate that processing of the extracellular matrix protein collagen XVIII starts during early reperfusion, as we observed a significantly increased expression of cleavage products at 10 and 75 kDa as well as ES at 150 min of normothermic ischemia-reperfusion. We further demonstrate a differential processing of collagen XVIII depending on temperature conditions during myocardial ischemia, as an increase in cleavage products was observed after normothermic ischemia only; however, expression of ES and other fragments remained unchanged after hypothermic ischemia-reperfusion and in controls. In conclusion, this blinded study first demonstrated that processing of extracellular matrix started early after ischemia-reperfusion and depends on temperature conditions. These findings may contribute to a broader understanding of matrix processing after ischemia-reperfusion.<newchar><newabs>11062755<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling and local neoplastic cell invasion. The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors have been shown to be critical modulators of ECM composition and are thus, crucial in tumor cell invasion and metastasis. The immunocytochemical profile of MMP-2, -3, -9, -10, and -13 expression was observed in 24 primary human childhood astrocytomas (ASTRs) employing an indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated antigen detection technique. Evaluation of the results was based on (a) the percent of neoplastically transformed cells that reacted positively and (b) a measure of staining intensity [graded from A (highest) to D (negative)]. The two forms of stromelysin, MMP-3 and -10, share 82% sequence homology, but exhibit differences in cellular synthesis and inducibility by cytokines and growth factors in vitro. Strong overall expression of MMP-3 and -10 was found in ASTRs, especially in the ECM adjacent to blood vessels. Positive immunoreactivity could be seen for these two MMPs in the ECM surrounding over 90% of the neoplastically transformed cells (+4) and the staining intensity was also the strongest possible (A,B). No immunoreactivity was detected using antibodies directed against MMP-2, -9, and -13. Based on these results, MMP-3 and -10 are implicated in the pathogenesis of pediatric ASTRs. Further characterization of the expression and utilization of MMPs and their inhibitors in the progression of ASTRs may establish differential regulation and utilization of the various MMPs during the progression of glial tumors, from low-grade pilocytic ASTR to high-grade glioblastoma multiforme.<newchar><newabs>19125650<newchar>Small-caliber vascular grafts (&lt; or =5 mm) constructed from synthetic materials for coronary bypass or peripheral vascular repair below the knee have poor patency rates, while autologous vessels may not be available for harvesting. The present study aimed to create a completely autologous small-caliber vascular graft by utilizing a bioabsorbable, macroporous poly(L/D)lactide 96/4 [P(L/D)LA 96/4] mesh as a support scaffold system combined with an autologous fibrin cell carrier material. A novel molding device was used to integrate a P(L/D)LA 96/4 mesh in the wall of a fibrin-based vascular graft, which was seeded with arterial smooth muscle cells (SMCs)/fibroblasts and subsequently lined with endothelial cells. The mold was connected to a bioreactor circuit for dynamic mechanical conditioning of the graft over a 21-day period. Graft cell phenotype, proliferation, extracellular matrix (ECM) content, and mechanical strength were analyzed. alpha-SMA-positive SMCs and fibroblasts deposited ECM proteins into the graft wall, with a significant increase in both cell number and collagen content over 21 days. A luminal endothelial cell lining was evidenced by vWf staining, while the grafts exhibited supraphysiological burst pressure (&gt;460 mmHg) after dynamic cultivation. The results of our study demonstrated the successful production of an autologous, biodegradable small-caliber vascular graft in vitro, with remodeling capabilities and supraphysiological mechanical properties after 21 days in culture. The approach may be suitable for a variety of clinical applications, including coronary artery and peripheral artery bypass procedures.<newchar><newabs>19554388<newchar>After ischemic injury to brain, disruption of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) raises the possibility of exposing the central nervous system (CNS) to oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), a risk factor implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), especially MMP-9, contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during the CNS diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying oxLDL-induced MMP-9 expression in astrocytes remained unclear. Here, we reported that oxLDL induced MMP-9 expression via a PKC-delta/p42/p44 MAPK-dependent Elk-1 activation in rat brain astrocyte (RBA)-1 cells, revealed by gelatin zymography, RT-PCR, and Western blotting analyses. These responses were attenuated by pretreatment with pharmacological inhibitors and transfection with dominant negative mutants. Moreover, Elk-1-mediated MMP-9 gene transcription was confirmed by transfection with an Elk-1 binding site-mutated MMP-9 promoter construct (mt-Ets-MMP9), which blocked oxLDL-stimulated MMP-9 luciferase activity. Understanding the regulatory mechanisms by which oxLDL induced MMP-9 expression in astrocytes might provide a new therapeutic strategy of brain diseases.<newchar><newabs>20939809<newchar>The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its main inhibitor PAI-1 play key roles in tumor-associated processes such as the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), tissue remodeling, cell adhesion and migration. Elevated expression of both molecules is known to correlate with negative outcomes in node negative breast cancer. To date, these molecules are the only prognostic markers to have reached the highest level of evidence (LOE I) in multi-centered clinical trials for prognosis of node negative breast cancer. Unfortunately, the clinical utility of these molecules as markers is limited by the use of enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests for their detection. The ELISA relies on the use of fresh or frozen tissue, which are rarely available in routine clinical settings. In this review article, we provide an overview of the clinical relevance of uPA and PAI-1 and present alternative methods for their detection. Common uPA and PAI-1 detection methods discussed in literature include RT-PCR-based assays and classical immunohistochemistry approaches. In recent years, attempts have been made to isolate and analyze proteins of formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. These new methods are of special interest because up to now neither RT-PCR nor immunohistochemistry are recommended for the detection of uPA and PAI-1. Here, we present an approach for the analysis of uPA and PAI-1 directly from FFPE tissues that may eventually overcome the limitations of current assays and make the use of both markers widely available for routine prognosis and therapy decisions for breast cancer patients.<newchar><newabs>19720507<newchar>Cytochalasin-D (Cyto-D) and latrunculin-A (Lat-A) are known inhibitors of actin microfilaments and adversely affect the physiological functions of anchorage-dependent cells. Alternatively, doxorubicin (Dox), a chemotherapeutic drug is known to induce apoptosis and cell detachment of tumor cells. However, the intricate interplay between drug administration, cytoskeletal rearrangement and biophysical responses of live cells on immobilized layer of extracellular matrix (ECM) protein remains unknown. In this study, the deadhesion kinetics and actin remodeling of live HepG2 cells following the addition of the three drugs are probed with confocal reflectance interference contrast microscopy (C-RICM) and fluorescence confocal microscopy. First, it is shown that the reduction in two-dimensional spread area of HepG2 cells is 10.5%, 15.4% and 21.9% under the influence of 5 microM of Lat-A, Cyto-D and Dox, respectively. Secondly, C-RICM demonstrates the recession of strong adhesion contact against time of cell seeding upon the addition of the three drugs. Thirdly, the initial cell detachment rate and extent of reduction in the degree of cell deformation (a/R) are dependent on both the drug types and concentration. Lastly, oscillation-like responses of a/R and adhesion energy are uniquely found in Lat-A induced cell detachment. Overall, our biophysical approaches have been proven as a highly quantitative platform for elucidating the interfacial properties of adherent cells on biomimetic surfaces under cytoskeleton disruption.<newchar><newabs>20666012<newchar>Successful cutaneous wound repair involves in a series of tightly coordinated and overlapping phases, including inflammation and clot formation, keratinocyte activation and migration (re-epithelialization), basement membrane and ECM remodeling, followed by dermal and epidermal maturation. We examine here the process of wound re-epithelialization, emphasizing the similarity between re-epithelialization and developmental epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), based on morphological and molecular criteria. Changes in cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion during re-epithelialization are also reminiscent of pathological processes described during malignant tumor progression, another situation involving partial or total EMT. We therefore propose that wound re-epithelialization represents a partial and reversible form of EMT.<newchar><newabs>15806380<newchar>This study was undertaken to investigate whether there might be differences in the distribution of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), depending on their specific sites within the heart. We investigated 33 explanted human hearts, 15 with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and 18 with ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM). Transmural samples from the right ventricle, the interventricular septum and the left ventricle, either from near the apex or from near the base were taken from every heart. Frozen sections were processed for connective tissue staining and immunohistochemistry for collagens type I, III, IV, laminin and fibronectin, as well as MMP-1, -2 and -9. Volume densities of laminin in ICM as well as of fibronectin and collagen types I and IV in DCM showed significant differences between right and left ventricular sites. The volume densities of matrix proteins usually did not reveal significant differences among the three left ventricular sites tested in both DCM and ICM. MMPs partly showed differences between the right and the left ventricular myocardium. These results suggest that the distributions of ECM proteins and MMPs differ between the two ventricles in both end-stage DCM and ICM. This gives rise to the hypothesis that a specific pattern of ECM degradation exists in the right and left ventricular myocardium.<newchar><newabs>19561311<newchar>Vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration is an important mechanism in atherogenesis and postangioplasty arterial remodeling. Previously, we demonstrated that the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-18 is a potent inducer of SMC migration. Since extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) stimulates ECM degradation and facilitates cell migration, we investigated whether IL-18 and EMMPRIN regulate each other's expression, whether their cross talk induces SMC migration, and whether the phytoalexin resveratrol inhibits IL-18-EMMPRIN signaling and SMC migration. Our studies demonstrate that 1) IL-18 induces EMMPRIN mRNA and protein expressions and stimulates EMMPRIN secretion from human aortic SMCs; 2) IL-18 stimulates EMMPRIN expression via oxidative stress and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt-ERK signaling; 3) IL-18-stimulated SMC migration is significantly blunted by EMMPRIN knockdown, EMMPRIN function-blocking antibodies, or adenoviral transduction of mutant EMMPRIN; 4) conversely, EMMPRIN stimulates IL-18 expression and secretion via PI3K, Akt, and ERK; and 5) resveratrol attenuates IL-18- and EMMPRIN-mediated PI3K, Akt, and ERK activations; blunts IL-18-mediated oxidative stress; blocks IL-18-EMMPRIN cross-regulation; and inhibits SMC migration. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the coexpression and regulation of IL-18 and EMMPRIN in the vessel wall may amplify the inflammatory cascade and promote atherosclerosis and remodeling. Resveratrol, via its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, has the potential to inhibit the progression of atherosclerosis by blocking IL-18 and EMMPRIN cross-regulation and SMC migration.<newchar><newabs>19521668<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key elements in extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and scar remodeling during the wound-healing process. Our previous data revealed that keratinocyte-releasable factors significantly increased the expression of fibroblast MMPs in monolayer-cultured fibroblasts. In this study, we analyzed the differences in the MMP expressions of fibroblasts in a three-dimensional fibroblast-populated collagen gel (3D FPCG) from that in a two-dimensional monolayer-cultured fibroblasts when both co-cultured with keratinocytes. Differential mRNA and protein expression of fibroblasts were examined by microarray, RT-PCR, and western blot. Our results showed that fibroblasts co-cultured with keratinocytes in a 3D FPCG expressed significantly higher MMP1 and MMP3 at the gene and protein levels. Due to the physiological advantages of a 3D FPCG model to a 2D system, we concluded that the 3D FPCG model may provide a better means of understanding the fibroblast-keratinocyte cross-talk during the wound-healing process.<newchar><newabs>19830595<newchar>The thrombospondins (TSPs) are a family of five matricellular proteins that appear to function as adapter molecules to guide extracellular matrix synthesis and tissue remodeling in a variety of normal and disease settings. Various TSPs have been shown to bind to fibronectin, laminin, matrilins, collagens and other extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The importance of TSP-1 in this context is underscored by the fact that it is rapidly deposited at the sites of tissue damage by platelets. An association of TSPs with collagens has been known for over 25 years. The observation that the disruption of the TSP-2 gene in mice leads to collagen fibril abnormalities provided important in vivo evidence that these interactions are physiologically important. Recent biochemical studies have shown that TSP-5 promotes collagen fibril assembly and structural studies suggest that TSPs may interact with collagens through a highly conserved potential metal ion dependent adhesion site (MIDAS). These interactions are critical for normal tissue homeostasis, tumor progression and the etiology of skeletal dysplasias.<newchar><newabs>10611911<newchar>Remodeling is a fundamental cardiac response to injury and involves cardiac fibroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) production. Angiotensin II (Ang II) directly promotes these changes in cardiac fibroblasts and thus, plays critical roles in cardiac hypertrophy and wound healing. Osteopontin, fibronectin and laminin mRNA were detected in total RNA harvested from cultured adult rat cardiac fibroblasts. Immunocytochemistry staining of cultured adult rat cardiac fibroblasts grown on coverslips revealed the presence of beta 3 integrins on the surfaces of the cells. In the present study, we investigated the role of Ang II in a model of wound repair using floating collagen gels harboring adult rat cardiac fibroblasts, and we determined which members of the integrin family existed on these cells. The presence of either MPIIIB10, a monoclonal antibody against osteopontin (7.2 micrograms/ml) or RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartate) peptide (10(4) M) had no effect on gel contraction. Osteopontin itself induced gel contraction; however this effect was completely neutralized by MPIIIB10 (7.2 micrograms/ml, RGD peptide (10(4) M) and a monoclonal antibody against rat beta 3 integrin (25 micrograms/ml). We identified alpha v, beta 3 and beta 5 integrins on adult rat cardiac fibroblasts by fluorescence-activated cell sorting and confirmed that RGD peptide and an antibody against beta 3 integrin completely blocked osteopontin-induced gel contraction. These results suggest that Ang II promotes cardiac wound healing and remodeling processes by inducing expression of osteopontin and beta 3 integrin by cardiac fibroblasts.<newchar><newabs>19191772<newchar>Chronic renal allograft injury is often reflected by interstitial fibrosis (IF) and tubular atrophy (TA) without evidence of specific etiology. In most instances, IF/TA remains an irreversible disorder, representing a major cause of long-term allograft loss. As members of the protease family metzincins and functionally related genes are involved in fibrotic and sclerotic processes of the extracellular matrix (ECM), we hypothesized their deregulation in IF/TA. Gene expression and protein level analyses using allograft biopsies with and without Banff'05 classified IF/TA illustrated their deregulation. Expression profiles of these genes differentiated IF/TA from Banff'05 classified Normal biopsies in three independent microarray studies and demonstrated histological progression of IF/TA I to III. Significant upregulation of matrix metalloprotease-7 (MMP-7) and thrombospondin-2 (THBS-2) in IF/TA biopsies and sera was revealed in two independent patient sets. Furthermore, elevated THBS-2, osteopontin (SPP1) and beta-catenin may play regulatory roles on MMP. Our findings further suggest that deregulated ECM remodeling and possibly epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) are implicated in IF/TA of kidney transplants, and that metzincins and related genes play an important role in these processes. Profiling of these genes may be used to complement IF/TA diagnosis and to disclose IF/TA progression in kidney transplant recipients.<newchar><newabs>19248169<newchar>In order for osteocytes to perceive mechanical information and regulate bone remodeling accordingly they must be anchored to their extracellular matrix (ECM). To date the nature of this attachment is not understood. Osteocytes are embedded in mineralized bone matrix, but maintain a pericellular space (50-80 nm) to facilitate fluid flow and transport of metabolites. This provides a spatial limit for their attachment to bone matrix. Integrins are cell adhesion proteins that may play a role in osteocyte attachment. However, integrin attachments require proximity between the ECM, cell membrane, and cytoskeleton, which conflicts with the osteocytes requirement for a pericellular fluid space. In this study, we hypothesize that the challenge for osteocytes to attach to surrounding bone matrix, while also maintaining fluid-filled pericellular space, requires different &quot;engineering&quot; solutions than in other tissues that are not similarly constrained. Using novel rapid fixation techniques, to improve cell membrane and matrix protein preservation, and transmission electron microscopy, the attachment of osteocyte processes to their canalicular boundaries are quantified. We report that the canalicular wall is wave-like with periodic conical protrusions extending into the pericellular space. By immunohistochemistry we identify that the integrin alphavbeta3 may play a role in attachment at these complexes; a punctate pattern of staining of beta3 along the canalicular wall was consistent with observations of periodic protrusions extending into the pericellular space. We propose that during osteocyte attachment the pericellular space is periodically interrupted by underlying collagen fibrils that attach directly to the cell process membrane via integrin-attachments.<newchar><newabs>19201080<newchar>Under most circumstances, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is noncytopathic. However, hepatocellular regeneration that accompanies each bout of hepatitis appears to be associated with increased integration of HBV DNA fragments expressing the virus encoded hepatitis B x antigen (HBxAg). Intrahepatic HBxAg staining correlates with the intensity and progression of chronic liver disease (CLD), and additional work has shown that HBxAg blocks immune mediated killing by Fas and by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha). This is not only associated with the blockage of caspase activities by HBxAg, but also by the constitutive stimulation of hepatoprotective pathways, such as nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and beta-catenin (beta-catenin). HBxAg also appears to promote fibrogenesis, by stimulating the production of fibronectin. HBxAg also stimulates the production and activity of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) by several mechanisms, thereby promoting the profibrogenic and tumorigenic properties of this important cytokine. In addition, HBxAg appears to remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) by altering the expression of several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which may promote tumor metastasis. Hence, HBxAg appears to promote chronic infection by preventing immune mediated apoptosis of infected hepatocytes, by promoting the establishment and persistence of fibrosis and cirrhosis preceding the development of HCC, and by promoting the remodeling of EMC during tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>19153673<newchar>A cell undergoes many genetic and epigenetic changes as it transitions to malignancy. Malignant transformation is also accompanied by a progressive loss of tissue homeostasis and perturbations in tissue architecture that ultimately culminates in tumor cell invasion into the parenchyma and metastasis to distant organ sites. Increasingly, cancer biologists have begun to recognize that a critical component of this transformation journey involves marked alterations in the mechanical phenotype of the cell and its surrounding microenvironment. These mechanical differences include modifications in cell and tissue structure, adaptive force-induced changes in the environment, altered processing of micromechanical cues encoded in the extracellular matrix (ECM), and cell-directed remodeling of the extracellular stroma. Here, we review critical steps in this &quot;force journey,&quot; including mechanical contributions to tissue dysplasia, invasion of the ECM, and metastasis. We discuss the biophysical basis of this force journey and present recent advances in the measurement of cellular mechanical properties in vitro and in vivo. We end by describing examples of molecular mechanisms through which tumor cells sense, process and respond to mechanical forces in their environment. While our understanding of the mechanical components of tumor growth, survival and motility remains in its infancy, considerable work has already yielded valuable insight into the molecular basis of force-dependent tumor pathophysiology, which offers new directions in cancer chemotherapeutics.<newchar><newabs>18996394<newchar>The assembly of collagen fibers, the major component of the extracellular matrix (ECM), governs a variety of physiological processes. Collagen fibrillogenesis is a tightly controlled process in which several factors, including collagen binding proteins, have a crucial role. Discoidin domain receptors (DDR1 and DDR2) are receptor tyrosine kinases that bind to and are phosphorylated upon collagen binding. The phosphorylation of DDRs is known to activate matrix metalloproteases, which in turn cleave the ECM. In our earlier studies, we established a novel mechanism of collagen regulation by DDRs; that is, the extracellular domain (ECD) of DDR2, when used as a purified, soluble protein, inhibits collagen fibrillogenesis in-vitro. To extend this novel observation, the current study investigates how the DDR2-ECD, when expressed as a membrane-anchored, cell-surface protein, affects collagen fibrillogenesis by cells. We generated a mouse osteoblast cell line that stably expresses a kinase-deficient form of DDR2, termed DDR2/-KD, on its cell surface. Transmission electron microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and hydroxyproline assays demonstrated that the expression of DDR2/-KD reduced the rate and abundance of collagen deposition and induced significant morphological changes in the resulting fibers. Taken together, our observations extend the functional roles that DDR2 and possibly other membrane-anchored, collagen-binding proteins can play in the regulation of cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix.<newchar><newabs>19458194<newchar>The physical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM) regulate the behavior of several cell types; yet, mechanisms by which cells recognize and respond to changes in these properties are not clear. For example, breast epithelial cells undergo ductal morphogenesis only when cultured in a compliant collagen matrix, but not when the tension of the matrix is increased by loading collagen gels or by increasing collagen density. We report that the actin-binding protein filamin A (FLNa) is necessary for cells to contract collagen gels, and pull on collagen fibrils, which leads to collagen remodeling and morphogenesis in compliant, low-density gels. In stiffer, high-density gels, cells are not able to contract and remodel the matrix, and morphogenesis does not occur. However, increased FLNa-beta1 integrin interactions rescue gel contraction and remodeling in high-density gels, resulting in branching morphogenesis. These results suggest morphogenesis can be &quot;tuned&quot; by the balance between cell-generated contractility and opposing matrix stiffness. Our findings support a role for FLNa-beta1 integrin as a mechanosensitive complex that bidirectionally senses the tension of the matrix and, in turn, regulates cellular contractility and response to this matrix tension.<newchar><newabs>19115257<newchar>Heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans are essential components of the cell-surface and extracellular matrix (ECM) which provide structural integrity and act as storage depots for growth factors and chemokines, through their HS side chains. Heparanase (HPSE) is the only mammalian endoglycosidase known that cleaves HS, thus contributing to matrix degradation and cell invasion. The enzyme acts as an endo-beta-D-glucuronidase resulting in HS fragments of discrete molecular weight size. Cell-surface HS is known to inhibit or stimulate tumorigenesis depending upon size and composition. We hypothesized that HPSE contributes to melanoma metastasis by generating bioactive HS from the cell-surface to facilitate biological activities of tumor cells as well as tumor microenvironment. We removed cell-surface HS from melanoma (B16B15b) by HPSE treatment and resulting fragments were isolated. Purified cell-surface HS stimulated in vitro B16B15b cell migration but not proliferation, and importantly, enhanced in vivo angiogenesis. Furthermore, melanoma cell-surface HS did not affect in vitro endothelioma cell (b.End3) migration. Our results provide direct evidence that, in addition to remodeling ECM and releasing growth factors and chemokines, HPSE contributes to aggressive phenotype of melanoma by releasing bioactive cell-surface HS fragments which can stimulate melanoma cell migration in vitro and angiogenesis in vivo.<newchar><newabs>19094985<newchar>All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) has been reported to inhibit the proliferation of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells and used in treatment of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) in animal model. This study aimed at examining the effectiveness of atRA in inhibiting the extracellular matrix (ECM) biosynthesis by RPE cells and the RPE cell-mediated collagen gel contraction. Cultured RPE cells were treated with atRA and the expression of four ECM proteins (collagen types I, III, IV and laminin beta1) was profiled. The results indicated that atRA treatment up-regulated de novo synthesis of collagen type I, but decreased that of laminin beta1 in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, the effect of atRA on RPE cell contraction was evaluated by measuring the area of collagen gel where RPE cells populated. Treatment with atRA significantly inhibited RPE cell-mediated collagen gel contraction. Addition of exogenous laminin nonapeptide into gels promoted RPE cell contraction, while atRA reversed the laminin-enhanced contractility. atRA treatment significantly suppressed the gene expression of integrin beta3 but not alphaV subunit, and effectively inhibited the tyrosine phosphorylation of integrin beta3 at residue 747 in RPE cells grown on laminin-coated dish, suggesting that atRA may suppress the RPE contractility through either inhibiting integrin beta3 expression or abrogating the integrin beta3-mediated signaling. In conclusion, atRA pharmacologically possesses a tissue-remodeling capacity and inhibits contractility of RPE cells. Therefore, atRA might be potentially a therapeutic agent for certain ocular disorders such as PVR.<newchar><newabs>18950615<newchar>Deregulation of epithelial-stromal interactions is considered to play a critical role in the initiation and promotion of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate carcinoma (PCa). Expression of tenascin-C (TN-C), an extracellular matrix (ECM) glycoprotein, is reportedly higher in BPH and PCa as compared with normal prostate. Remodeling of the ECM alters the homeostatic balance between epithelium and stroma, resulting in physiological changes in cellular functions. To investigate the role of TN-C in prostatic development and differentiation, we evaluated the morphological phenotype of TN-C knockout (KO) mouse prostate (ventral: VP, dorsolateral: DLP, and anterior: AP) and examined tissue recombinants composed of adult mouse DLP epithelium and fetal TN-C KO urogenital sinus mesenchyme (UGM). Histological analysis showed epithelial cell clusters protruding into the ductal lumens in TN-C KO AP and DLP. Interestingly, binucleated cells appeared in epithelium of TN-C KO DLP at 8 weeks. Simultaneously, androgen receptor (AR)-positive cells were decreased in TN-C KO epithelia. Similar to the TN-C KO phenotype, protruded epithelial clusters, binucleated cells, and AR-negative nuclei were induced in DLP epithelium by recombining with TN-C KO UGM. Our results suggest that stromal TN-C might be involved in maintaining epithelial cytodifferentiation, morphogenesis, and androgen receptor expression of normal prostate glands in adult mice.<newchar><newabs>19920349<newchar>Vascular inflammation contributes to cardiovascular diseases such as aortic aneurysm and dissection. However, the precise inflammatory pathways involved have not been clearly defined. We have shown here that subcutaneous infusion of Ang II, a vasopressor known to promote vascular inflammation, into older C57BL/6J mice induced aortic production of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 and the monocyte chemoattractant MCP-1. Production of these factors occurred predominantly in the tunica adventitia, along with macrophage recruitment, adventitial expansion, and development of thoracic and suprarenal aortic dissections. In contrast, a reduced incidence of dissections was observed after Ang II infusion into mice lacking either IL-6 or the MCP-1 receptor CCR2. Further analysis revealed that Ang II induced CCR2+CD14hiCD11bhiF4/80- macrophage accumulation selectively in aortic dissections and not in aortas from Il6-/- mice. Adoptive transfer of Ccr2+/+ monocytes into Ccr2-/- mice resulted in selective monocyte uptake into the ascending and suprarenal aorta in regions of enhanced ROS stress, with restoration of IL-6 secretion and increased incidence of dissection. In vitro, coculture of monocytes and aortic adventitial fibroblasts produced MCP-1- and IL-6-enriched conditioned medium that promoted differentiation of monocytes into macrophages, induced CD14 and CD11b upregulation, and induced MCP-1 and MMP-9 expression. These results suggest that leukocyte-fibroblast interactions in the aortic adventitia potentiate IL-6 production, inducing local monocyte recruitment and activation, thereby promoting MCP-1 secretion, vascular inflammation, ECM remodeling, and aortic destabilization.<newchar><newabs>18508607<newchar>It is becoming increasingly clear that interactions between cancer cells, stroma cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) are pivotal to the processes of neovascularization and tumorigenesis. As tumor stromal components known as tumor associated macrophages (TAMs), mononuclear phagocytes can play a key role in tumor type specific neoangiogenesis by promoting remodeling of the ECM through the production of matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), secreting pro-angiogenic growth factors and stabilizing the tumor vasculature. The growth factor colony-stimulating factor-1 is produced by a wide variety of cancer cells and tumor stroma cells and influences the migration, survival and phenotype of TAMs. Thus, understanding the relationships of the cancer cell with the host environment is key for specifically exploiting tumor growth promoting tumor host interactions for new therapeutic strategies. This review outlines the strategies for targeting CSF-1 in malignancies to influence TAMs in tumor development.<newchar><newabs>18490007<newchar>Fibronectin (FN) is a multifunctional glycoprotein present in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and plasma. We previously reported that the glycosylation and ligand-binding of vitronectin (VN) change markedly after partial hepatectomy (PH). Here we show the changes of FN during liver regeneration. The yields of purified sham-operated (SH-) and PH-FN were higher than that of non-operated (NO)-FN, while binding activities of FNs to ECM ligands were changed only slightly by hepatectomy. The carbohydrate concentration of PH-FN decreased to 66% of that of NO- and SH-FN. By using LC/MS(n), eight kinds of complex-type N-glycan structures were found to be present in all FNs, and bi- and trisialobiantennary glycans were the major structures. Fucosylation was markedly increased, while O-acetylation of sialic acid was found to be decreased in PH-FN. The alterations in glycosylation and biological activities of FN after PH are different from those of VN, suggesting that these glycoproteins play different biological functions in tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>18600216<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc endopeptidases composed of 23 members in humans, which belong to a subfamily of the metzincin superfamily. They play important roles in many pathophysiological events including development, organogenesis, angiogenesis, tissue remodeling and destruction, and cancer cell proliferation and progression by degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and non-ECM proteins and interaction with various molecules. Here, we present standard protocols for purification of native proMMPs (proMMP-1, -2, -3, -7, -9 and -10) and recombinant MT1-MMP (MMP-14) using conventional column chromatography. Purification steps comprise the initial common step [diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)-cellulose, Green A Dyematrex gel and gelatin-Sepharose columns], the second step for removal of nontarget proMMPs by immunoaffinity columns (anti-MMP-1 and/or anti-MMP-3 IgG-Sepharose columns) and the final step for further purification (IgG-Sepharose, DEAE-cellulose, Zn2+-chelate-Sepharose and/or gel filtration columns). Purified proMMPs and MMP are functionally active and suitable for biochemical analyses. The basic protocol for the purification from culture media takes approximately 7-10 d.<newchar><newabs>18804107<newchar>The poor prognosis of glioblastoma patients is related to diffuse brain invasion and interaction of tumor cells with extracellular matrices (ECM). We describe expression and function of the FACIT-collagen XVI in glioblastomas. We found upregulation of collagen XVI mRNA as well as protein in glioblastomas as compared to normal cortex. SiRNA knockdown resulted in decreased cell adhesion whereas increased adhesion was observed on surfaces coated with collagen XVI. The migration of glioblastoma cells on this substrate remained unchanged. Our results demonstrate de-novo expression of collagen XVI in glioblastomas as part of the tumor specific remodeling of the ECM.<newchar><newabs>17976322<newchar>Varicose veins (VVs) classically result from venous hypertension owing to incompetence of the major communications between the superficial and deep veins of the lower extremity. In a significant number of patients, there is no demonstrable truncal saphenous reflux and varicosities are the result of isolated perforating and nonsaphenous vein incompetence. The clinical and histologic features of VVs are the result of disruption of the normal architectural structure of the venous wall as a consequence of remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in response to increased venous distention and altered hemodynamic shear stress. Although a number of genes, growth factors, proteases, and their inhibitors known to modulate the ECM have been implicated in the pathogenesis of VVs, their etiology remains unknown. The complex variations in venous anatomy in patients with VVs require detailed vein mapping to determine the source and drainage locations of reflux if the rates of residual and recurrent varicosities are to be reduced. The distinct pathogenic mechanisms involved in the development of VVs have important implications for the management of VVs that include a wide spectrum of treatment modalities ranging from reassurance, alternative medicines, conservative management or compression therapy, and surgical or endovascular therapy.<newchar><newabs>17980567<newchar>Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent adult stem cells capable to differentiate into osteoblasts. Therefore, they represent attractive cell sources for tissue engineering applications, especially for bone replacement. Proteoglycans (PGs) exhibit a crucial role for matrix assembly and remodeling. Nevertheless, since bone development is a highly dynamic and complex process, the regulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) formation remains elusive. Consequently, the aim of this study was to investigate the mRNA expression levels of genes involved in PG assembly in different stages of osteogenesis. For the rate-limiting enzyme in glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis xylosyltransferase I (XT-I), maximal mRNA expression levels (3.89 +/- 0.83-fold increase) and elevated enzyme activities (285 +/- 17 dpm/mug DNA) were observed 10 days after osteogenic induction, simultaneously to the beginning mineralization of the ECM, whereas the highly homologous protein XT-II showed no specific alterations. The differential expression of chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate chains was determined by analyzing the mRNA expression of EXTL2 (alpha-1,4-N-acetylhexosaminyltransferase), GalNAcT (beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase), and GlcAC5E (glucuronyl C5-epimerase) as they represent crucial enzymes in GAG biosynthesis. Besides GlcAC5E, all key enzymes showed upregulated mRNA contents (up to 3.6-fold) around day 10. Except for decorin, which exhibited heightened mRNA levels even in the early stages of osteogenesis, we found similar upregulated mRNA contents (up to 14.6-fold) for all investigated PG core proteins. The synchronized expression profiles demonstrate the coordinated biosynthesis of the PGs during bone formation and osteogenic stem cell differentiation occurring in parallel to the mineralization of the extracellular matrix.<newchar><newabs>18095189<newchar>The role of cell adhesion molecules (CAM) and extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) in various pathological processes including angiogenesis, thrombosis, apoptosis, cell migration &amp; proliferation are well documented. These processes can lead to both acute and chronic disease states such as ocular diseases, metastasis, unstable angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, osteoporosis, a wide range of inflammatory diseases, vascular remodeling, and neurodegenerative disorders. A key success in this field is evident from the potential role of the platelet GPIIb/IIIa integrin in the prevention and diagnosis of various thromboembolic disorders. Additionally, the use of soluble adhesion molecules as potential diagnostic markers for acute and chronic leukocyte, platelet, and endothelial cellular insult are increasingly utilized. The development of various therapeutic and diagnostic candidates based on the key role of CAM, with special emphasis on integrins in various diseases as well as the structure-function aspects of cell adhesion and signaling of the different CAM and ECM are highlighted.<newchar><newabs>18276934<newchar>Extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) invade human decidua via sequential integrin-mediated binding and proteolysis of basement membrane proteins in the extracellular matrix (ECM). In preeclampsia, shallow EVT invasion impairs spiral artery and arteriole remodeling to reduce uteroplacental blood flow. Excess decidual cell-expressed matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 2 and 9, in response to preeclampsia-related interleukin 1 beta (IL1B) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF), may inappropriately degrade these basement membrane proteins and impede EVT invasion. This study found significantly higher immunohistochemical MMP9 levels in decidual cells and adjacent interstitial trophoblasts in placental sections of preeclamptic versus gestational age-matched control women. In contrast, immunostaining for MMP2 and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases 1 and 2 (TIMP1 and TIMP2) were similar in preeclamptic and control groups. First-trimester decidual cells were incubated with estradiol (E(2)) or E(2) + medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), with or without TNF or IL1B. As measured by ELISA, both cytokines elicited concentration-dependent increases in secreted MMP9 levels that were unaffected by MPA. In contrast, secreted levels of MMP2, TIMP1, and TIMP2 were unchanged in all treatment groups. Substrate gel zymography and Western blotting confirmed that each cytokine increased secreted levels of MMP9 but not MMP2. Similarly, quantitative RT-PCR found that TNF and IL1B enhanced MMP9, but not MMP2, mRNA levels. At the implantation site, inflammatory cytokine-enhanced MMP9 may promote preeclampsia by disrupting the decidual ECM to interfere with normal stepwise EVT invasion.<newchar><newabs>18577581<newchar>beta1 integrins are major cell surface receptors for fibronectin. Some integrins, including beta1 integrins, are known to undergo constitutive endocytosis and recycling. Integrin endocytosis/recycling has been implicated in the regulation of cell migration. However, the mechanisms by which integrin endocytosis/recycling regulates cell migration, and other biological consequences of integrin trafficking are not completely understood. We previously showed that turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) fibronectin occurs via receptor-mediated endocytosis. Here, we investigate the biological relevance of beta1 integrin endocytosis to fibronectin matrix turnover. First, we demonstrate that beta1 integrins, including alpha5beta1 play an important role in endocytosis and turnover of matrix fibronectin. Second, we show that caveolin-1 constitutively regulates endocytosis of alpha5beta1 integrins, and that alpha5beta1 integrin endocytosis can occur in the absence of fibronectin and fibronectin matrix. We also show that downregulation of caveolin-1 expression by siRNA results in marked reduction of beta1 integrin and fibronectin endocytosis. Hence, caveolin-1-dependent beta1 integrin and fibronectin endocytosis plays a critical role in fibronectin matrix turnover, and may contribute to abnormal ECM remodeling that occurs in fibrotic disorders.<newchar><newabs>17122157<newchar>Several families of enzymes are responsible for the degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins during the remodeling of tissues. An important family of such enzymes is that of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). To control MMP-mediated ECM breakdown, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are able to inhibit MMP activity. A disturbed balance of MMPs and TIMPs is found in various pathologic conditions, such as cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, and periodontitis. The role of MMPs in pathology has been extensively described in the literature. The main focus of this review lies in the biological functions of TIMPs and their occurrence in disease, especially in the head and neck area. Their biological functions and their role in diseases like oral cancers and periodontitis, and in the development of cleft palate, will be discussed. Finally, the diagnostic and therapeutical opportunities of TIMPs will be evaluated.<newchar><newabs>17728286<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are endopeptidases that degrade the proteins of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Expression and activity of the MMPs are essential for embryogenesis, where MMPs participate in the normal ECM remodeling that occurs during tissue morphogenesis and development. Studies have demonstrated that MMP gene expression is inhibited by glucocorticoids in mammalian cell culture systems and that exposure to glucocorticoids causes developmental abnormalities in several species. Therefore, we proposed that glucocorticoids impede normal development through alteration of MMP expression. Zebra fish (Danio rerio) were used as a model to study MMP-13 expression both during normal embryogenesis and following acute exposure to two glucocorticoids, dexamethasone, and hydrocortisone. MMP-13 is one of three collagenases identified in vertebrates that catalyzes the degradation of type I collagens at neutral pH. MMP-13 expression varied during zebra fish development, with peak expression at 48 h post-fertilization (hpf). Morpholino knockdown studies showed that MMP-13 expression is necessary for normal zebra fish embryogenesis. Acute exposure to dexamethasone and hydrocortisone resulted in abnormal zebra fish development including craniofacial abnormalities, altered somitogenesis, blood pooling and pericardial and yolk sac edema as well as increased MMP-13 mRNA and activity at 72 hpf. In situ hybridization experiments were used to confirm the increase in MMP-13 expression following glucocorticoid treatment and showed elevated MMP-13 expression in the rostral trunk, brain, eye, heart, and anterior kidney of treated embryos. These data demonstrate that normal zebra fish embryogenesis requires MMP-13 and that dexamethasone and hydrocortisone modulate the expression of this gene, leading to increased activity and potentially contributing to subsequent dysmorphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>17416542<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes that digest components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) as well as cell surface receptors for soluble factors and junctional proteins involved in cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions. MMPs are involved in many physiological processes that require tissue remodeling but are also expressed in nearly all tumors, where they stimulate tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. Previous studies have shown that expression of stromelysin-1/MMP-3 in the mammary glands of transgenic mice causes the production of invasive carcinomas; our recent investigations provide insight into how MMPs can promote the development of such tumors. We show that exposing mouse mammary epithelial cells to MMP-3 stimulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a phenotypic alteration in which epithelial cells acquire invasive mesenchymal characteristics. EMT is a necessary component of embryonic development, but acquisition of EMT characteristics by cancer cells facilitates invasion and metastasis. MMP-3-induced EMT involves induction of Snail, a transcription factor long studied for its role in physiological EMT but which is increasingly recognized as a factor involved in tumor progression and malignancy. In this review, we examine how MMPs and Snail function in tumor progression and how identification of an MMP-Snail signaling axis provides insight into new anticancer therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>18023704<newchar>Heparanase is an endoglycosidase which cleaves heparan sulfate (HS) and hence participates in degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The enzyme also releases angiogenic factors from the ECM and thereby induces an angiogenic response in vivo. Heparanase is preferentially expressed in human tumors and its over-expression in tumor cells confers an accelerated growth and invasive phenotype in experimental animals. In contrast, heparanase gene silencing is associated with a marked inhibition of tumor progression. Heparanase upregulation correlates with increased tumor vascularity and poor postoperative survival of cancer patients. Studies on relationships between structure and the heparanase-inhibiting activity of nonanticogulant heparins systematically differing in their O-sulfation patterns, degrees of N-acetylation, and glycol-splitting of nonsulfated uronic acid residues, have permitted to select effective inhibitors of the enzymatic activity of heparanase. N-acetylated, glycol-split heparins emerged as highly effective and specific inhibitors of heparanase and tumor growth and metastasis. Several observations support the involvement of heparanase in haemostasis. A marked induction of tissue factor (TF) was noted in response to heparanase over-expression in tumor-derived cell lines and heparanase over-expressing transgenic mice. A direct correlation was also found between heparanase and TF expression levels in leukemia patients. TF induction was even more pronounced upon exogenous addition of heparanase to primary endothelial cells that do not normally express TF, and this induction was associated with enhanced coagulation. These and other results indicate that pro-heparanase is rapidly tethered on cell surfaces, partially depending on cell surface heparan sulfate, generating a local procoagulant effect. In addition, pro-heparanase can reverse the anti-coagulant effect of unfractionated heparin and the Factor Xa inhibitory activity of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). These effects were also demonstrated in plasma derived from patients treated with LMWH. The pro-coagulant effects of pro-heparanase were also exerted by a peptide corresponding to its major functional heparin-binding domain. Heparanase pro-coagulant activities suggest its possible role as a natural regulator of heparinoid anti-coagulant activities, and point to a possible use of this molecule or its heparin binding domain as antidote for heparinoid therapies.<newchar><newabs>19262140<newchar>Normal vascular development and angiogenesis is regulated by coordinated changes in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. The Homeobox (Hox) family of transcription factors coordinately regulate expression of matrix degrading proteinases, integrins and ECM components and profoundly impact vascular remodeling. Whereas HoxA5 is down regulated in active angiogenic endothelial cells (EC), sustained expression of HoxA5 induces TSP-2 and blocks angiogenesis. Since HoxA5 is also lacking in EC in proliferating hemangiomas, we investigated whether restoring expression of HoxA5 could normalize hemangioma cell morphology and/or behavior. Sustained expression of HoxA5 in the murine hemangioma cell line (EOMA) reduced their growth in vivo and promoted branching morphogenesis in 3D BM cultures. Moreover, restoring HoxA5 expression increased the retention of beta-catenin in adherens junctions and reduced permeability. In addition we also show that the HoxA5 mediated increase in stability of adherens junctions requires Akt1 activity and introduction of constitutively active myr-Akt in EOMA cells also increased retention of beta-catenin in adherens junctions. Finally we show that HoxA5 increases Akt1 mRNA, protein expression and further enhances Akt activity via a coordinate down regulation of PTEN. Together these results demonstrate a central role for HoxA5 in coordinating a stable vascular phenotype.<newchar><newabs>17587814<newchar>Dynamic interactions and dissolution of cell-extracellular matrix contacts are required steps to support cell growth and survival during cancer cell metastasis. Malignant cells acquire the ability to remodel extracellular matrix (ECM) and to modulate the expression of ECM receptors. Integrins are cellular receptors for molecules in the extracellular matrix. Integrin signaling is known to regulate metastatic cancer phenotypes by interacting synergistically with several signaling pathways, including the growth factor receptor pathway, the Ras-MAP kinase (Ras-MAPK) pathway and the Rho-effector pathway. In this mini-review, we discuss the functions of the Rho proteins and their relationship with other signaling pathways in matrix remodeling and integrin signaling of highly motile and invasive cancer cells.<newchar><newabs>17012236<newchar>Reactive astrogliosis is the gliotic response to brain injury with activated astrocytes and microglia being the major effector cells. These cells secrete inflammatory cytokines, proteinases, and proteinase inhibitors that influence extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. In astrocytes, the expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) is up-regulated by interleukin-1 (IL-1), which is a major neuroinflammatory cytokine. We report that IL-1 activates TIMP-1 expression via both the IKK/NF-kappaB and MEK3/6/p38/ATF-2 pathways in astrocytes. The activation of the TIMP-1 gene can be blocked by using pharmacological inhibitors, including BAY11-7082 and SB202190, overexpression of the dominant-negative inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkappaBalphaSR), or by the knock-down of p65 subunit of NF-kappaB. Binding of activated NF-kappaB (p50/p65 heterodimer) and ATF-2 (homodimer) to two novel regulatory elements located -2.7 and -2.2 kb upstream of the TIMP-1 transcription start site, respectively, is required for full IL-1-responsiveness. Mutational analysis of these regulatory elements and their weak activity when linked to the minimal tk promoter suggest that cooperative binding is required to activate transcription. In contrast to astrocytes, we observed that TIMP-1 is expressed at lower levels in gliomas and is not regulated by IL-1. We provide evidence that the lack of TIMP-1 activation in gliomas results from either dysfunctional IKK/NF-kappaB or MEK3/6/p38/ATF-2 activation by IL-1. In summary, we propose a novel mechanism of TIMP-1 regulation, which ensures an increased supply of the inhibitor after brain injury, and limits ECM degradation. This mechanism does not function in gliomas, and may in part explain the increased invasiveness of glioma cells.<newchar><newabs>16987520<newchar>Interstitial fluid flow has been shown to affect the organization and behavior of cells in 3D environments in vivo and in vitro, yet the forces driving such responses are not clear. Due to the complex architecture of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the difficulty of measuring fluid flow near cells embedded in it, the levels of shear stress experienced by cells in this environment are typically estimated using bulk-averaged matrix parameters such as hydraulic permeability. While this is useful for estimating average stresses, it cannot yield insight into how local matrix fiber architecture-which is cell-controlled in the immediate pericellular environment-affects the local stresses imposed on the cell surface. To address this, we used computational fluid dynamics to study flow through an idealized mesh constructed of a cubic lattice of fibers simulating a typical in vitro collagen gel. We found that, in such high porosity matrices, the fibers strongly affect the flow fields near the cell, with peak shear stresses up to five times higher than those predicted by the Brinkman equation. We also found that minor remodeling of the fibers near the cell surface had major effects on the shear stress profile on the cell. These findings demonstrate the importance of fiber architecture to the fluid forces on a cell embedded in a 3D matrix, and also show how small modifications in the local ECM can lead to large changes in the mechanical environment of the cell.<newchar><newabs>17018899<newchar>Structural changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling. MMPs, VEGF, Ki-67 (proliferative protein), and constituents of ECM play a critical role in angiogenesis and underlie neoplastic invasion and metastasis. This prompted us to investigate the effect of a diet containing lysine, proline, arginine, ascorbic acid, and green tea extract (NM) on the growth of tumors induced by implanting human osteosarcoma MNNG in athymic nude mice and the expression of MMPs, VEGF, Ki-67 and fibronectin in these tumors, as well as the production of mucin (by PAS staining). We also investigated the effect of the supplemented diet on serum ascorbic acid, total protein content, alkaline phosphatase activity, and liver enzymes. Athymic male nude mice (n = 12) were inoculated with 3 x 10(6) osteosarcoma cells MNNG-HOS and randomly divided into group A (fed a regular diet) and group B (fed a regular diet supplemented with 0.5% NM). Four weeks later, the mice were sacrificed. Results showed that NM inhibited the growth and reduced the size of tumors in nude mice. Histological evaluation revealed increased mitotic index, MMP-9, and VEGF secretion in the control group tissues. Results demonstrate that the nutrient mixture of lysine, proline, arginine, ascorbic acid, and green tea extract tested strongly suppressed the growth of tumors without adverse effects in nude mice, suggesting potential as an anticancer agent.<newchar><newabs>17012256<newchar>RPE65 is the retinal isomerase essential for conversion of all-trans-retinyl ester to 11-cis-retinol in the visual cycle. Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA), an autosomal recessive form of RP resulting in blindness, is commonly caused by mutations in the Rpe65 gene. Whereas the molecular mechanisms by which these mutations contribute to retinal disease remain largely unresolved, affected patients show marked RPE damage and photoreceptor degeneration. We evaluated gene expression in Rpe65-/- mouse model of LCA before and at the onset of photoreceptor cell death in 2, 4, and 6 month old animals. Microarray analysis demonstrates altered expression of genes involved in phototransduction, apoptosis regulation, cytoskeleton organization, and extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents. Cone-specific phototransduction genes are strongly decreased, reflecting early loss of cones. In addition, remaining rods show modified expression of genes encoding components of the cytoskeleton and ECM. This may affect rod physiology and interaction with the adjacent RPE and lead to loss of survival signals, as reflected by the alteration of apoptosis-related genes Together, these results suggest that RPE65 defect triggers an overall remodeling of the neurosensitive retina that may, in turn, disrupt photoreceptor homeostasis and induce apoptosis signaling cascade toward retinal cell death.<newchar><newabs>17483349<newchar>Angiogenesis and tumor metastasis depend on extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and subsequent cellular interactions with these modified proteins. An in-depth understanding of how both endothelial and tumor cells use matrix-immobilized cryptic ECM epitopes to regulate invasive cell behavior may lead to the development of novel strategies for the treatment of human tumors. However, little is known concerning the existence and the functional significance of cryptic laminin epitopes in regulating angiogenesis and tumor cell metastasis. Here, we report the isolation and characterization of a synthetic peptide that binds to a cryptic epitope in laminin. The STQ peptide selectively bound denatured and proteolyzed laminin but showed little interaction with native laminin. The cryptic laminin epitope recognized by this peptide was selectively exposed within malignant melanoma in vivo, whereas little if any was detected in normal mouse skin. Moreover, the STQ peptide selectively inhibited endothelial and tumor cell adhesion, migration, and proliferation in vitro and inhibited angiogenesis, tumor growth, and experimental metastasis in vivo. This inhibitory activity was associated with a selective up-regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor P27(KIP1) and induction of cellular senescence. These novel findings suggest the existence of functionally relevant cryptic laminin epitopes in vivo and that selective targeting of these laminin epitopes may represent an effective new strategy for the treatment of malignant tumors by affecting both the endothelial and tumor cell compartments.<newchar><newabs>17653826<newchar>Understanding the complex mechanisms underlying bone remodeling is crucial to the development of novel therapeutics. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) localised to the extracellular matrix (ECM) of bone are thought to play a key role in mediating aspects of bone development. The influence of isolated GAGs was studied by utilising in vitro murine calvarial monolayer and organ culture model systems. Addition of GAG preparations extracted from the cell surface of human osteoblasts at high concentrations (5 microg/ml) resulted in decreased proliferation of cells and decreased suture width and number of bone lining cells in calvarial sections. When we investigated potential interactions between the growth factors fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2), bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP2) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGFbeta1) and the isolated cell surface GAGs, differences between the two model systems emerged. The cell culture system demonstrated a potentiating role for the isolated GAGs in the inhibition of FGF2 and TGFbeta1 actions. In contrast, the organ culture system demonstrated an enhanced stimulation of TFGbeta1 effects. These results emphasise the role of the ECM in mediating the interactions between GAGs and growth factors during bone development and suggest the GAG preparations contain potent inhibitory or stimulatory components able to mediate growth factor activity.<newchar><newabs>17095861<newchar>Heparanase is a mammalian endoglucuronidase responsible for heparan sulfate (HS) degradation. HS is a major constituent of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and HS-degrading activity plays a decisive role in fundamental biological processes associated with remodeling of the ECM, such as cancer metastasis, angiogenesis and inflammation. There is great interest in the prospect of genome-wide association studies to identify genetic factors underlying complex diseases. It is important to establish a detailed description of the heparanase (HPSE) gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In this study, four Israeli Jewish populations (Ashkenazi, North African, Mediterranean and Near Eastern) were examined for 7 HPSE gene SNPs. Four out of 7 SNPs (rs4693608, db11099592, rs4364254, db6856901) were found to be polymorphic. Population comparisons revealed significant differences in SNPs allele frequency between Near Eastern and each of the other three populations. Genotype and allele frequencies in Jewish populations were different from non-Jewish populations, except for a certain similarity to Caucasians. Although the distance between SNPs is relatively small, the db11099592 SNP was in linkage disequilibrium (LD) only with the proximal SNP rs4693608. LD between distal SNPs rs4364254 and db6856901 was found only in Mediterraneans and North Africans. The current study provides a characterization of the normally occurring HPSE gene SNPs in different populations. This information is obligatory for further studies on the linkage between these SNPs and heparanase expression and function in various pathological processes, primarily cancer progression.<newchar><newabs>16791855<newchar>Invasive behavior is the pathological hallmark of malignant gliomas, being responsible for the failure of surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are essential for proper ECM remodeling and invasion. The tumor and metastasis suppressor RECK protein regulates at least three members of the MMPs family: MMP-2, MMP-9, and MT1-MMP. In order to mimic the in vivo invasion process, A172 and T98G, respectively, non-invasive and invasive human glioblastoma cell lines, were cultured onto uncoated (control) or type I collagen gel-coated surface, and maintained for up to 7 days to allow establishment of the invasive process. We show that the collagen substrate causes decreased growth rates and morphological alterations correlated with the invasive phenotype. Electronic transmission microscopy of T98G cells revealed membrane invaginations resembling podosomes, which are typically found in cells in the process of crossing tissue boundaries, since they constitute sites of ECM degradation. Real time PCR revealed higher RECK mRNA expression in A172 cells, when compared to T98G cells and, also, in samples obtained from cultures where the invasive process was fully established. Interestingly, the collagen substrate increases RECK expression in A172 cells and the same tendency is displayed by T98G cells. MMPs-2 and -9 displayed higher levels of expression and activity in T98G cells, and their activities are also upregulated by collagen. Therefore, we suggest that: (1) RECK downregulation is critical for the invasiveness process displayed by T98G cells; (2) type 1 collagen could be employed to modulate RECK expression in glioblastoma cell lines. Since a positive correlation between RECK expression and patients survival has been noted in several types of tumors, our results may contribute to elucidate the complex mechanisms of malignant gliomas invasiveness.<newchar><newabs>16672006<newchar>Increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition in the airway wall contributes to the airway remodeling in asthmatics. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are polysaccharides attached to a protein core in order to form proteoglycans, a component of the ECM. In this study, we investigated the possible influence of long-term treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) on urinary GAGs levels of asthmatic children. Seventy asthmatic children (41 boys), aged 6.8-12.5 yr, participated in the study. About 44 were treated with inhaled budesonide via turbuhaler for 2-35 months (median 12 months) and 26 were on relief medications. About 30 healthy controls were also studied. GAGs were precipitated from early morning urine samples, collected, isolated and quantified using uronic acid-carbazole reaction and expressed as uronic acid (UA) in microg/g/Cr(u)/m2. Urinary GAGs values did not differ significantly between controls and asthmatics but significant differences were found between children on ICS and asthmatics on relief medications (p &lt; 0.001). There was a positive correlation between the daily dose of inhaled budesonide and the urinary GAGs values (r = 0.32, p = 0.037) whereas a threshold distinguishing 'low' vs. 'high' doses of ICS was found to be at 300 microg/m2 per day with a significant difference in urinary GAGs secretion (p = 0.006). Our data show that urinary GAGs secretion is reduced in asthmatic children that used only relief medication but it is increased in those on long-term treatment with ICS. A dose dependent effect of ICS was also detected.<newchar><newabs>16418836<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteases capable of degrading various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Among them, the membrane type MMP-1 (MT1-MMP) has been shown to participate in the activation of MMP gelatinase A (GelA), suggesting that they may function together in development and pathogenesis. Here, we have investigated the spatiotemporal expression profiles of Xenopus laevis MT1-MMP and GelA genes during thyroid-hormone-dependent metamorphosis. We have focused our studies on two organs: (1) the intestine, which undergoes first the degeneration of the tadpole epithelium through apoptosis and then the development of adult epithelium and other tissues, and (2) the tail, which completely resorbs through programmed cell death. We show that both MT1-MMP and GelA are upregulated in the intestine and tail when both organs undergo metamorphosis. Within the organs, MT1-MMP and GelA are coexpressed in the connective tissues during both natural and thyroid-hormone-induced metamorphosis. In addition, MT1-MMP (but not GelA) is also expressed in the longitudinal muscle cells of the metamorphosing intestine. These results suggest that MT1-MMP and GelA function together in the ECM degradation or remodeling associated with metamorphosis and that MT1-MMP has additional GelA-independent roles in the development of adult longitudinal muscle in the intestine.<newchar><newabs>17055228<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a large family of extracellular or membrane-bound proteases. Their ability to cleave extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins has implicated a role in ECM remodeling to affect cell fate and behavior during development and in pathogenesis. We have shown previously that membrane-type 1 (MT1)-MMP [corrected] is coexpressed temporally and spatially with the MMP gelatinase A (GelA) in all cell types of the intestine and tail where GelA is expressed during Xenopus laevis metamorphosis, suggesting a cooperative role of these MMPs in development. Here, we show that Xenopus GelA and MT1-MMP interact with each other in vivo and that overexpression of MT1-MMP and GelA together in Xenopus embryos leads to the activation of pro-GelA. We further show that both MMPs are expressed during Xenopus embryogenesis, although MT1-MMP gene is expressed earlier than the GelA gene. To investigate whether the embryonic MMPs play a role in development, we have studied whether precocious expression of these MMPs alters development. Our results show that overexpression of both MMPs causes developmental abnormalities and embryonic death by a mechanism that requires the catalytic activity of the MMPs. More importantly, we show that coexpression of wild type MT1-MMP and GelA leads to a cooperative effect on embryonic development and that this cooperative effect is abolished when the catalytic activity of either MMP is eliminated through a point mutation in the catalytic domain. Thus, our studies support a cooperative role of these MMPs in embryonic development, likely through the activation of pro-GelA by MT1-MMP.<newchar><newabs>16972260<newchar>Differentiation of myofibroblast, as evidenced by alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) expression, is largely mediated by transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1). This mechanism often follows inflammatory events such as endothelial damage due to oxidative stress, which can further leads to vascular thickening, stiffness, and fibrosis. We hypothesized that hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy)-induced oxidative stress lead to vascular stiffness, in part due to endothelial-myofibroblast differentiation and alteration of collagen homeostasis in the extracellular matrix (ECM). We tested our hypothesis in vitro using mouse aortic endothelial cells (MAEC). Our result shows that Hcy induces alpha-SMA and collagen type-1 expression in MAEC as evidenced by immunoblot and confocal imaging. RT-PCR shows robust increase of alpha-SMA and collagen type-1 mRNA level in Hcy-induced condition. We demonstrated that Hcy induces autophosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) (a member of the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) family) at Tyr-397. PP2 (general PTK inhibitor) as well as FAK siRNA abrogates Hcy-mediated alpha-SMA formation. In addition to that, Hcy-mediated TGF-beta1 induction was inhibited by TGF-beta R1 kinase inhibitor II (ALK5 inhibitor II) and attenuated FAK phosphorylation and alpha-SMA expression. Furthermore, we showed that Hcy activates ERK-44/42 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) pathway and augments collagen type-1 deposition. Studies with pharmacological ERK blocker, PD98059 and ERK siRNA attenuated ERK-44/42 phosphorylation and collagen type-1 synthesis. Taken together our results demonstrate that Hcy-mediated TGF-beta1 upregulation triggers endothelial-myofibroblast differentiation secondary to FAK phosphorylation and that Hcy-induced ERK activation is involved in ECM remodeling by altering collagen type-1 homeostasis.<newchar><newabs>16298629<newchar>Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation play key roles in the development and the progression of vascular remodeling such as transplant arteriosclerosis and restenosis. The present study examined the effects of sirolimus (SRL) on platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced fibronectin secretion, collagen synthesis, and the related signaling pathways including reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) in rat VSMCs. Primary rat VSMCs were isolated from male Sprague-Dawley rats. Growth arrested, synchronized cells were treated with various concentrations of SRL before the addition of PDGF at 10 ng/mL. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression, fibronectin secretion, and the activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) and p38 MAPK were assessed by Western blot analysis, collagen synthesis by [(3)H]-proline incorporation, and cellular ROS by flow cytometry. PDGF (10 ng/mL) increased VSMC proliferation by 1.7-fold, fibronectin secretion by 1.5-fold, collagen synthesis by 2.1-fold, cellular ROS by 1.6-fold, and activation of ERK and p38 MAPK by 3.3- and 3.9-fold compared to controls. SRL above 1 nmol/L inhibited PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation and collagen synthesis but not PDGF-induced fibronectin secretion, cellular ROS, and activation of ERK and p38 MAPK. These data demonstrated that PDGF increased ECM synthesis as well as proliferation through cellular ROS and subsequent MAPK activation and that SRL inhibited PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation and collagen synthesis in a cellular ROS- and MAPK activation-independent way.<newchar><newabs>16452201<newchar>Heparanase is an endo-beta-D-glucuronidase involved in cleavage of heparan sulfate moieties and hence participates in extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and remodeling. Traditionally, heparanase activity was correlated with the metastatic potential of a variety of tumor-derived cell types. Cloning of the heparanase gene indicated that heparanase expression is up-regulated in a variety of primary human tumors. In some cases, heparanase up-regulation correlated with increased tumor vascularity, an angiogenic feature that could be recapitulated in a number of in vitro and in vivo models. The mechanism by which heparanase enhances angiogenic responses is not entirely clear but is thought to be mediated primarily by release of ECM-resident angiogenic growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Here, we examined the possibility that heparanase directly participates in VEGF gene regulation. We provide evidence that heparanase overexpression in human embryonic kidney 293, MDA-MB-435 human breast carcinoma, and rat C6 glioma cells resulted in a 3- to 6-fold increase in VEGF protein and mRNA levels, which correlated with elevation of p38 phosphorylation. Moreover, heparanase down-regulation in B16 mouse melanoma cells by a specific siRNA vector was accompanied by a decrease in VEGF and p38 phosphorylation levels, suggesting that VEGF gene expression is regulated by endogenous heparanase. Interestingly, a specific p38 inhibitor did not attenuate VEGF up-regulation by heparanase whereas Src inhibitors completely abrogated this effect. These results indicate, for the first time, that heparanase is actively involved in the regulation of VEGF gene expression, mediated by activation of Src family members.<newchar><newabs>16185688<newchar>Retinal ganglion cell (RGC) death is an important issue in Primary Open Angle-Glaucoma (POAG) in terms of both vision loss and health care costs. Yet, the pathophysiology underlying RGC death in glaucoma is unclear. A growing body of evidence indicates that proteases that modulate the extracellular matrix (ECM) milieu in the retina, either directly or indirectly, play an important role in dictating the fate of RGCs. Recent evidence indicates that proteases, in addition to ECM-remodeling, have broader functional roles in glutamate receptor processing and predisposing RGCs to secondary damage. This review is focused on discussing the role of two groups of proteases, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the plasminogen activators (PAs), in RGC death. In a long-run, a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the regulation of proteases may lead to the development of adjunctive treatment options to attenuate RGC death and improve vision loss in glaucoma.<newchar><newabs>18560621<newchar>Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is a copper-dependent amine oxidase that catalyzes the covalent cross-link of collagens and elastin in the extracellular environment, thereby determining the mechanical properties of extracellular matrix (ECM) and connective tissues. ECM remodeling is a common feature of diverse pathologic processes. Therefore, dysregulation of LOX could underlie the onset and progression of multiple pathologies affecting connective tissue, such as fibrotic processes, tumor progression and metastasis and neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases. Here we review clinical and experimental evidence that supports a role for LOX in the pathophysiology of those processes and point out LOX as a potential therapeutic target.<newchar><newabs>15979292<newchar>Although bone is composed primarily of extracellular matrix (ECM), the dynamic role that the ECM plays in regulating bone remodeling secondary to estrogen loss is relatively unexplored. Previous studies have shown that mice deficient in the matricellular protein thrombospondin-2 (TSP2-null) form excess endocortical bone; thus, we postulated that enhanced bone formation in TSP2-null mice could protect against ovariectomy (OVX)-induced bone loss. Wild-type (WT) OVX mice showed a significant loss of both midfemoral endocortical and proximal tibial trabecular bone, but OVX did not significantly alter TSP2-null bone. TSP2-null mice showed an increase in bone formation, as indicated by a 70% increase in serum osteocalcin two weeks post OVX and a two-fold increase in bone formation rate (BFR) five weeks post OVX as measured by dynamic histomorphometry. WT animals showed only a 20% increase in serum osteocalcin at two weeks and no change in BFR at five weeks. This increase in bone formation in TSP2-null OVX mice was accompanied by a three-fold increase in osteoprogenitor number. Although these results provide a partial explanation for the maintenance of bone geometry post-OVX, TSP2-null mice five weeks post-OVX also showed a significantly lower level of bone resorption than OVX WT mice, as determined by serum levels of the amino-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (NTx). We conclude that the absence of TSP2 protects against OVX-induced bone loss by two complementary processes: increased formation and decreased resorption.<newchar><newabs>16680576<newchar>Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are endogenous inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the balance between MMPs/TIMPs regulates the extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and remodeling during normal development and pathogenesis. Increasing evidence indicates a much more complex role for TIMPs during tumor progression and angiogenesis, in addition to their regulation of MMP-mediated ECM degradation. In this article, we review both the MMP-dependent and -independent actions of TIMPs for the regulation of cell death, cell proliferation, and angiogenesis, with a particular emphasis on TIMP-1 in the regulation of tetraspanin/integrin-mediated cell survival signal transduction pathways.<newchar><newabs>15983115<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is achieved by both production and degradation of ECM molecules during bone development. ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type 1 motifs) constitutes a family of extracellular proteases which are implicated in cleaving the protein versican. The present study was designed to investigate the expression of versican and ADAMTS1, 4, and 5 mRNA during bone development in rat mandibles and hind limbs by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Versican was localized by immunohistochemistry. The process of bone development from day 14 postcoitum through week 6 postnatum was divided into the beginning of osteogenesis, woven bone, and lamellar bone stages. Versican protein was abundant in the woven bone matrix, but decreased in the lamellar bone matrix. Versican mRNA was prominent in some osteoblasts with corresponding localization of the cognate protein. The temporal and spatial mRNA expression pattern of ADAMTS1, 4, and 5 was comparable to that of versican. These results suggest that woven bone rich in versican alters into lamellar bone containing little versican during bone development in both mandibles and hind limbs, where some osteoblasts may be involved in production as well as degradation of versican by secreting ADAMTS1, 4, and 5.<newchar><newabs>15910882<newchar>To study the complex interaction between oxidative injury and the pathogenesis of vascular disease, vascular gene expression was examined in male Sprague-Dawley rats given 35 or 70 mg/kg allylamine, a synthetic amine converted to acrolein and hydrogen peroxide within the vascular wall. Vascular lesions and extensive vascular remodeling, coupled to increased production of 8-epi-PGF2alpha, nuclear localization of NFkappaB, and alterations in glutathione homeostasis, were observed in animals treated with allylamine for up to 20 days. Transcriptional profiling, immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization showed that genes involved in adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM) (alpha(1) integrin, collagen), cytoskeletal rearrangements (alpha-smooth muscle actin, alpha-tropomyosin), and signal transduction (NFkappaB, osteopontin, and LINE) were altered by oxidant treatment. To evaluate mechanisms of gene dysregulation, cultured aortic smooth muscle cells were challenged with allylamine or its metabolites and processed for molecular analysis. These agents increased formation of reactive oxygen species and elicited changes in gene expression similar to those observed in vivo. Oxidative stress and changes in gene expression were inhibited by N-acetyl cysteine, a precursor of glutathione. These results indicate that genes along the ECM-integrin-cytoskeletal axis, in addition to LINE, are molecular targets in oxidant-induced vascular injury.<newchar><newabs>15950557<newchar>The ovary is a unique and dynamic organ in respect to rapid and extensive degrees of tissue development and remodeling that are periodically repeated in the female reproductive activity. Ovulation is a directed and sequential process accompanied by broad-spectrum proteolysis and culminates in the follicular rupture to release the matured oocyte. This review will focus on the potential roles of six representative proteinases that are involved in various aspects of ovulatory processes: matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), plasminogen activator (PA)/plasmin, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain with thrombospondin motif (ADAMTS), cathepsin-L, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A), and bone morphogenetic protein 1/mammalian Tolloid (BMP-1/mTld). Based on the studies of expression and function, these selected proteinases provide and share diverse functions ranging from cleaving components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) to modulating non-ECM molecules, such as various growth factors and their binding proteins. Consistently, the genetic deletion of each individual gene in mice shows their functional overlap in the reproductive activity.<newchar><newabs>15451466<newchar>The alpha1beta1 integrin, also known as &quot;very late antigen&quot; (VLA)-1, is normally expressed on mesenchymal cells, some epithelial cells, activated T cells, and macrophages, and interacts, via the I-domain of the extracellular domain of the alpha1 subunit, with collagen molecules in the extracellular matrix (ECM). By &quot;outside-in&quot; transmembranal signaling to the interior of the cell, it mediates adhesion, migration, proliferation, remodeling of the ECM, and cytokine secretion by endothelial cells, mesangial cells, fibroblasts, and immunocytes. Importantly, its expressions and functions are enhanced by inflammatory cytokines including interferon (IFN)gamma and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha, thus augmenting angiogenesis and fibrosis linked, in particular, to inflammation. Moreover, within the immune system, VLA-1 marks effector memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells that are retained in extralymphatic tissues by interactions of the integrin with collagen and produce high levels of IFNgamma. Thus, immune-mediated inflammation in vivo is inhibited by blockade of the VLA-1-collagen interaction in experimental animal models of arthritis, colitis, nephritis, and graft versus host disease (GVHD), suggesting that inhibiting the interaction of the alpha1 I-domain with its ligands or modulating &quot;outside-in&quot; signaling by VLA-1 would be a useful approach in the human diseases simulated by these experimental models.<newchar><newabs>15637621<newchar>New generations of synthetic biomaterials are being developed at a rapid pace for use as three-dimensional extracellular microenvironments to mimic the regulatory characteristics of natural extracellular matrices (ECMs) and ECM-bound growth factors, both for therapeutic applications and basic biological studies. Recent advances include nanofibrillar networks formed by self-assembly of small building blocks, artificial ECM networks from protein polymers or peptide-conjugated synthetic polymers that present bioactive ligands and respond to cell-secreted signals to enable proteolytic remodeling. These materials have already found application in differentiating stem cells into neurons, repairing bone and inducing angiogenesis. Although modern synthetic biomaterials represent oversimplified mimics of natural ECMs lacking the essential natural temporal and spatial complexity, a growing symbiosis of materials engineering and cell biology may ultimately result in synthetic materials that contain the necessary signals to recapitulate developmental processes in tissue- and organ-specific differentiation and morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>15788755<newchar>Angiogenesis is crucial in human development. Extravillous trophoblast (EVT) cells mimic endothelial cells in angiogenesis during endovascular differentiation, inducing a remodeling of spiral arteries that increases blood flow toward the intravillous space. We have previously shown that tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha regulates expression of ITGA6 and ITGA1, which are involved in cell survival, in the human EVT cell line TCL1. To further investigate endovascular differentiation, we examined the effects of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), TNF, and extracellular matrix (ECM) on TCL1 cells. Seeded on Matrigel, TCL1 cells show tube-like formation that specifically recalls morphological changes in endothelial cells. Anti-ITGAV/ITGB3 antibodies significantly reduced the size of the capillary network (P &lt; 0.05) on Matrigel and also suppressed TNF-induced apoptosis (P &lt; 0.05) in TCL1 cells. VEGF induced expression of ITGAV/ITGB3 subunits and protein aggregation, as in the case of TNF, which in turn, induces synthesis of VEGF in TCL1 cells. Soluble FLT1 suppressed these activities in TCL1 cells, indicating that signals involving VEGF axis are essential for endovascular differentiation. These results suggest that TNF, VEGF, and ECM collaboratively regulate EVT behavior, including cell survival and endovascular differentiation, through integrin signaling during establishment and maintenance of successful human pregnancies.<newchar><newabs>15254771<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-3 (ST3 or MMP11) was initially identified as a breast carcinoma associated protease and has since been shown to be highly expressed in diverse carcinomas and in developmental processes that involve extensive cell death (apoptosis) and tissue remodeling. Unlike other MMPs, purified ST3 has little activity toward known extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in vitro but cleaves strongly a few non-ECM, extracellular proteins, including human alpha1-proteinase inhibitor (alpha1-PI). To investigate the possibility of alpha1-PI as a conserved physiological substrate for ST3 during vertebrate development, we analyzed the ability of Xenopus laevis ST3 catalytic domain to cleave frog alpha1-PI. Surprisingly, we found the ST3 failed to recognize the site in alpha1-PI equivalent to the major cleavage site in human alpha1-PI by mammalian ST3. Sequence and mutagenic analysis revealed that multiple substitutions at P2-P3' positions between human and Xenopus alpha1-PI contributed to the inability of Xenopus alpha1-PI to be cleaved by ST3. Our studies showed that (A)(G/A)(A)(M)(F/A)(L) (P3-P3') as a preferred cleavage site for ST3. We further demonstrated that mutations in the cleavage sites affected cleavage by ST3 differently from several other MMPs. These findings, together with earlier reports on ST3, showed that ST3 has distinct substrate specificities compared to other MMPs. Our results further suggest that alpha1-PI is unlikely to be a physiological substrate for ST3, at least with regard to evolutionarily conserved developmental processes.<newchar><newabs>15024695<newchar>During accelerated vascular remodeling such as in atherosclerosis, the composition of the extracellular matrix becomes altered. The matrix components of the diseased artery influence cellular processes such as adhesion, migration and proliferation. Furthermore, in atherosclerosis, the inability of the cells within the lesion to produce a mechanically stable matrix may lead to plaque rupture. In this immunohistochemical study of atherosclerotic mice aorta, we have reviewed the presence of ECM components with roles in maintaining tissue structure and function. These components include osteopontin and COMP as well as the leucine rich repeats proteins decorin, PRELP, and fibromodulin. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated presence of osteopontin, COMP, decorin, PRELP and fibromodulin in lesion areas of ApoE/LDLr deficient mice. Some advanced lesions exhibited areas of cartilage-like morphology and were shown to represent cartilage by their content of the cartilage specific proteins collagen II and aggrecan. The results suggest that cartilage-associated cell/collagen binding ECM proteins may be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.<newchar><newabs>16175601<newchar>Injury and repair in chronic liver disease involve cell adhesion, migration, apoptosis, proliferation, and a wound healing response. In liver, fibroblast activation protein (FAP) has both collagenase and dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPIV) activities and is expressed only by activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC) and myofibroblasts, which produce and degrade extracellular matrix (ECM). FAP was colocalized with collagen fibers, fibronectin, and collagen type I in human liver. FAP function was examined in vitro by expressing green fluorescent protein FAP fusion protein in cell lines cultured on collagen-I, fibronectin, and Matrigel. Glutamates at 203 and 204 as well as serine624 of FAP were essential for peptidase activity. Human embryonic kidney 293T cells overexpressing FAP showed reduced adhesion and migration. FAP overexpression in the human HSC line LX-2 caused increased cell adhesion and migration on ECM proteins as well as invasion across transwells in the absence or presence of transforming growth factor beta-1. FAP overexpression enhanced staurosporine streptomyces-stimulated apoptosis in both cell lines. Interestingly, the enzyme activity of FAP was not required for these functions. Overexpressing FAP increased the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and CD44 and reduced integrin-beta1 expression in 293T cells, suggesting potential pathways of FAP-mediated impairment of cell adhesion and migration in this epithelial cell line. In conclusion, these findings further support a pro-fibrogenic role for FAP by indicating that, in addition to its enzymatic functions, FAP has important nonenzymatic functions that in chronic liver injury may facilitate tissue remodeling through FAP-mediated enhancement of HSC cell adhesion, migration, and apoptosis.<newchar><newabs>15377994<newchar>Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the gynecological disease with the highest death rate. We applied an automatic class discovery procedure based on gene expression profiling to stages III-IV tumors to search for molecular signatures associated with the biological properties and progression of EOC. Using a complementary DNA microarray containing 4451 cancer-related, sequence-verified features, we identified a subset of EOC characterized by the expression of numerous genes related to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and its remodeling, along with elements of the fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) signaling pathway. A total of 10 genes were validated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, and coexpression of FGF2 and fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 in tumor cells was revealed by immunohistochemistry, confirming the reliability of gene expression by cDNA microarray. Since the functional relationships among these genes clearly suggested involvement of the identified molecular signature in processes related to epithelial-stromal interactions and/or epithelial-mesenchymal cellular plasticity, we applied supervised learning analysis on ovarian-derived cell lines showing distinct cellular phenotypes in culture. This procedure enabled construction of a gene classifier able to discriminate mesenchymal-like from epithelial-like cells. Genes overexpressed in mesenchymal-like cells proved to match the FGF2 signaling and ECM molecular signature, as identified by unsupervised class discovery on advanced tumor samples. In vitro functional analysis of the cell plasticity classifier was carried out using two isogenic and immortalized cell lines derived from ovarian surface epithelium and displaying mesenchymal and epithelial morphology, respectively. The results indicated the autocrine, but not intracrine stimulation of mesenchymal conversion and cohort/scatter migration of cells by FGF2, suggesting a central role for FGF2 signaling in the maintenance of cellular plasticity of ovary-derived cells throughout the carcinogenesis process. These findings raise mechanistic hypotheses on EOC pathogenesis and progression that might provide a rational underpinning for new therapeutic modalities.<newchar><newabs>15226419<newchar>A major component of the vessel wall of large arteries and veins is the extracellular matrix (ECM), which consists of collagens, elastin, and proteoglycans. Collagen type I is one of the most abundant of the ECM proteins. We have previously shown that the pro-collagen type I alpha 2 gene contains an enhancer which confers tissue-specific expression in the majority of collagen-producing cells, including blood vessels. In this paper, we delineate a specific vascular smooth muscle cell (vSMC) element: a 100-bp sequence around -16.6 kb upstream of the transcription start site that regulates collagen expression exclusively in vSMCs. Furthermore, we show that the expression is activated through the binding of the homeodomain protein Nkx2.5, which is further potentiated in the presence of GATA6. In contrast, this element was repressed by the binding of the zinc-finger protein deltaEF1/ZEB1. We propose a model of regulation where the activating transcription factor Nkx2.5 and the repressor deltaEF1/ZEB1 compete for an overlapping DNA binding site. This element is important in understanding the molecular mechanisms of vessel remodeling and is a potential target for intervention in vascular diseases where there is excessive deposition of collagen in the vessel wall.<newchar><newabs>15307165<newchar>The native extracellular matrix (ECM) of elastic tissues is strong and flexible and supports cell adhesion and enzymatic matrix remodeling. In an attempt to convey these ECM properties to a synthetic scaffold appropriate for soft tissue engineering applications, a biodegradable, elastomeric poly(ester urethane)urea (PEUU) was combined with type I collagen at various ratios (2.5, 5, 10, 20, 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 wt% collagen) and electrospun to construct elastic matrices. Randomly orientated fibers in the electrospun matrices ranged in diameter from 100-900 nm, dependent on initial polymer concentration. Picrosirius red staining of matrices and CD spectroscopy of released collagen confirmed collagen incorporation and preservation of collagen structure at the higher collagen mass fractions. Matrices were strong and distensible possessing strengths of 2-13 MPa with breaking strains of 160-280% even with low PEUU content. Collagen incorporation significantly enhanced smooth muscle cell adhesion onto electrospun scaffolds. An approach has been demonstrated that mimics elastic extracellular matrices by using a synthetic component to provide mechanical function together with a biomacromolecule, collagen. Such matrices may find application in engineering soft tissue.<newchar><newabs>15685464<newchar>Implanted pure titanium fixtures are able to completely integrate with bone, in part because of the formation of a strong extracellular matrix (ECM) bond at the titanium-bone interface. In this study, we used a rodent femur model of intramedullary osseointegration to analyze the changes in immunoreactivity of ECM-controlling matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) during osseointegration. We observed dramatic increases in MMP-2, MMP-9, MMP-7, TIMP-3, and TNF-alpha in osteocytes, osteoclasts, haversian canals, and the interface matrix in bone ipsilateral to the titanium implant. An increase in TIMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-7 in hypertrophied chondrocytes and the vascular component of the epiphysial growth plate was also observed in experimental bone. These findings were not seen in contralateral or sham-operated bone, where the titanium fixtures were threaded into the femur and immediately removed. Our data link titanium-induced bone remodeling to changes in expression and distribution of MMPs.<newchar><newabs>12890718<newchar>Osteopontin (OPN) is an acidic member of the small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoprotein (SIBLING) family of extracellular matrix proteins/cytokines that undergoes extensive posttranslational modification, including phosphorylation, glycosylation, and cleavage, yielding molecular mass variants ranging in size from 25 to 75 kDa. The result is a versatile protein(s) with multiple functions arising from its role as a mediator of cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) communication that encompass both normal and tumorigenic developmental processes, immunological responses during inflammation and wound healing, and biomineralization. Studies in primates, pigs, sheep, and rodents have revealed that OPN is a major constituent of the uterine-placental microenvironment with influence as 1) a component of histotroph required for adhesion and signal transduction at the uterine-placental interface throughout pregnancy, 2) a gene product expressed by uterine stroma contributing to a decidualization-like transformation that correlates with the degree of conceptus invasiveness, and 3) a product of resident uterine and placental immune cells that may regulate their behavior and cytokine production. This minireview summarizes information regarding uterine and placental expression of OPN that has accumulated over the past 15 yr, and we briefly describe structural/functional properties of this protein that are likely relevant to its role(s) during pregnancy. Comparative studies have offered insights into the potential hormonal/cytokine, cellular, and molecular mechanisms underlying OPN-mediated adhesion, remodeling, and cell-cell/cell-ECM communication within the uterus and placenta. OPN has the potential to profoundly impact pregnancy, and investigators are now challenged to focus on the mechanistic nature of the functions of this multifaceted and major component of the uterine-placental microenvironment.<newchar><newabs>14614076<newchar>Molecules comprising the extracellular matrix (ECM), and the family of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that regulate them, perform essential functions during neuroplasticity in both developing and adult nervous systems, including substrate guidance during neuritogenesis and the establishment of boundaries for axonal terminal fields. MMP proteolysis of ECM molecules may perform a permissive or inductive role in fiber remodeling and synaptogenesis initiated by deafferentation. This study examined functional and structural effects of MMP inhibition during the early phases of deafferentation-induced sprouting, characterizing components of the degeneration/proliferation cycle that may be dependent on MMP activity. Adult rats received unilateral lesions of the entorhinal cortex to induce collateral sprouting of the crossed temporodentate fiber pathway. This was followed by intraventricular infusion of the MMP inhibitor FN-439 (2.9 mg/kg) or saline vehicle. After 7 d postlesion, rats underwent in vivo electrophysiological recording or histological processing for electron microscopic analysis. Lesioned rats receiving vehicle exhibited normal sprouting and synaptogenesis, with the emergence of the capacity for long-term potentiation (LTP) within the sprouting pathway, and the successful clearance of degenerating terminals with subsequent synaptic proliferation. In contrast, lesioned rats receiving the MMP inhibitor failed to develop the capacity for LTP and showed persistent cellular debris. Current source density analysis also revealed an FN-439-induced disruption of the current sink, normally localized to the middle region of the granule cell dendrites, corresponding to the terminal field of the crossed temporodentate fibers. These results establish a role for MMP-dependent processes in the deafferentation/sprouting cycle.<newchar><newabs>12082274<newchar>Integrins are adhesion receptor heterodimers that transmit information from the extracellular matrix (ECM) to the cell through activation of cell signaling pathways. Chondrocytes express several members of the integrin family including alpha5beta1 which is the primary chondrocyte receptor for fibronectin. Cell signaling mediated through integrins regulates several chondrocyte functions including differentiation, matrix remodeling, responses to mechanical stimulation and cell survival. Integrin-mediated activation of members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family likely plays a key role in transmitting signals regulating chondrocyte gene expression. Upstream mediators of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) activation include focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (pyk2) which are both expressed by chondrocytes. A better understanding of chondrocyte integrin signaling is needed to define the mechanisms by which the ECM regulates chondrocyte function.<newchar><newabs>11967218<newchar>Prostaglandin F(2alpha) (PGF(2alpha)) typically initiates a cascade of events that leads to the functional and structural demise of the corpus luteum. A sheep model was used in which a 1-h, systemic infusion of PGF(2alpha) (20 microg/min) is given at midcycle. Such an infusion mimics the onset of spontaneous luteolysis by causing a transient decrease in peripheral plasma progesterone, which reaches a nadir ( approximately 60% of controls) at 8 h but returns to control levels by 16-24 h. We investigated whether PGF(2alpha) also influenced the endogenous protein levels of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, and matrix metalloproteinases, MMP-2 and MMP-9, all of which have been implicated in remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Corpora lutea (Day 11) were collected at 0 h and at 1, 8, 16, and 24 h post-PGF(2alpha) infusion (n = 3 sheep at each time). Immunoblot analysis revealed an immediate and precipitous decline in TIMP-1 (30 kDa) and TIMP-2 (19 kDa) protein levels (60% and 90%, respectively; P &lt; 0.05) at the 1-h time point and remained depressed at 8 h (P &lt; 0.05). Gelatin zymography and other procedures identified three MMPs (85, 70, and 64 kDa), which were shown to be the latent form of MMP-9 and the active and latent forms of MMP-2, respectively. In contrast to the rapid decrease in TIMP-1 and -2 levels, an increase in MMP-2 activity (165% of controls, P &lt; 0.05) occurred at 8 h, which corresponded to the nadir in plasma progesterone. These early changes in TIMPs and MMPs indicate that alterations in the structure of the ECM by PGF(2alpha) may play a hitherto unsuspected role in the subsequent process of functional luteolysis.<newchar><newabs>11906929<newchar>Members of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family collectively degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) and help regulate luteal function. The objectives of these experiments were to characterize the mRNA expression, localization, and activity of MMPs 2, 9, and 14 in ovine corpora lutea (CL). Ovine CL were collected on Days 2, 4, 10, and 15 of the estrous cycle (Day 0 = estrus). Messenger RNA transcripts for MMPs 2 and 14 were detected using Northern analysis; however, expression of MMP-9 was undetectable. Expression of MMP-14 mRNA (membrane type-1 MMP) was increased (P &lt; 0.05) on Day 4; whereas, expression of MMP-2 mRNA was highest (P &lt; 0.05) on Day 10, which corresponded to the observed increases in gelatinolytic activity in luteal homogenates as measured by a fluroscein-labeled gelatin substrate assay. MMP 2 and 9 proteins were localized predominantly to large luteal cells (LLCs), whereas MMP-14 was localized primarily to cells other than LLCs as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. Immunolocalization of MMP-2 to putative endothelial cells was also observed on Day 15. Localization of MMP activity was determined using in situ zymography. Luteal tissues contained gelatinolytic activity primarily localized pericellularly to various cell types, including LLCs. These results support the hypothesis that ECM remodeling occurs throughout the luteal phase and may help potentiate cellular migration, differentiation, angiogenesis, and growth factor bioavailability.<newchar><newabs>15743035<newchar>Syndecan-1, a cell surface proteoglycan found predominantly on epithelia of mature tissues, binds both extracellular matrix (ECM) components and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and is implicated in the restriction of growth and invasiveness of neoplastic cells, as it induces the adhesion capacity of neoplastic cells with the stroma. In this study we investigated breast carcinomas for the immunohistochemical expression of syndecan-1 protein and these results were assessed in relation to clinicopathological parameters, in order to clarify its prognostic value. The possible relationship with hormone receptors content, p53, cell proliferation markers, and extracellular matrix components was also estimated. Tissue sections from 102 breast carcinomas were used and immunostainings were performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections by the labelled streptavidin avidin biotin (LSAB) method. High expression levels were observed, as 75/102 (73.5%) cases expressed immunoreactivity in more than 80% of neoplastic cells, while 67/102 (65.7%) exhibited high staining intensity. The survival analysis showed an increased mortality risk associated with high syndecan-1 staining intensity with borderline significance (p=0.041). In addition, there was a strong negative correlation between syndecan-1 protein expression and ECM, specifically collagen IV (p=0.026) and tenascin (p=0.0067). The results of the present study show the implication of this protein in the remodeling of breast cancer tissue, through the interaction with other extracellular matrix components, probably influences the tumour progression.<newchar><newabs>11704502<newchar>Fetal development and tumor progression both require a complex system of extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and breakdown, which is mediated by, for instance, the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Human metalloelastase (MMP-12) is an MMP, the expression of which has so far been documented in macrophages associated with atherosclerosis, wound repair, and certain cancers. In this study we first examined the expression of MMP-12 during human fetal development. By in situ hybridization MMP-12 transcripts were detected in chondrocytes of hypertrophic cartilage in vertebrae of the spinal column, in ribs, and in extremities undergoing ossification, beginning at the gestational age of 8 weeks. Also, periosteal cells expressed MMP-12 at 11 weeks. No expression of MMP-12 mRNA could be noted in other fetal tissues, including the skin, lungs, intestine, kidney, and liver. Expression of MMP-12 mRNA could not be detected in adult normal cartilage or osteosarcomas, but in chondrosarcomas both macrophages (8 of 19 samples) (identified by CD68 immunostaining) and chondrosarcoma cells (8 of 19) were positive. MMP-12 was also demonstrated in the tumors by western blotting and it was expressed in the same regions as MMP-13 mRNA. By immunostaining, MMP-12 mRNA colocalized with the protein in both fetal and chondrosarcoma specimens. Unlike basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induced MMP-12 mRNA production in chondrosarcoma-derived HTB-94 cells. Our results suggest that MMP-12 plays an important role in ECM remodeling during fetal bone development and is induced when chondrocytes undergo malignant transformation.<newchar><newabs>11522674<newchar>Adipocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia together with angiogenesis contribute to the growth of the fat mass. Because changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) components are often associated with such cellular remodeling, we studied the adipocyte expression of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 2 and 9, two key enzymes involved in the modulation of ECM. The present study provides the first evidence that human adipose tissue produces and secretes MMP-2 and -9 as shown by gelatin zymography analysis performed on media conditioned by human subcutaneous adipose tissue and human preadipocytes in primary cultures and by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis on transcripts from mature human adipocytes. The further characterization performed on the murine 3T3F442A preadipocyte cell line demonstrates that MMP expression, assessed by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis, as well as activity, assessed by gelatin zymography analysis, increased during the adipocyte differentiation, whereas the expression of tissue inhibitor metalloproteinases 1 and 2 were abolished or not affected, respectively. Finally, preadipocyte treatment with MMP inhibitors such as batimastat and captopril, as well as neutralizing antibodies, markedly decreased adipocyte differentiation as demonstrated by the inhibition in the appearance of lipogenic (triglycerides) and lipolytic (glycerol release and hormone-sensitive lipase expression) markers. These data suggest that MMP-2 and -9 could be important key regulators of adipocyte differentiation. Thus, the adipocyte-derived MMPs might represent a new target for the inhibition of adipose tissue growth.<newchar><newabs>11159347<newchar>Apoptotic processes are often associated with an intense proteolytic remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Proteolytic degradation of the ECM can also be a signal that induces apoptosis. Here, we have investigated the expression pattern and functional role of the matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-3 in follicular atresia. Twenty-four hours after the treatment of immature female mice with a low dose of eCG, both apoptosis and the stromelysin-3 mRNA expression were suppressed approximately threefold. However, the initial suppression of apoptosis and stromelysin-3 expression was followed by a time-dependent increase, and 96 h after eCG treatment, the levels were similar to those of untreated control mice. In 15- to 16-day-old juvenile mice, the ovary consisted of relatively undeveloped follicles, and almost no apoptosis and only low stromelysin-3 mRNA expression were observed. However, at the age of 21 days, when several antral follicles were present, a fivefold induction in both apoptosis and stromelysin-3 mRNA expression was detected. For both models, in situ analysis revealed that the expression of stromelysin-3 mRNA was localized to the granulosa cells of atretic follicles. To address the functional role of stromelysin-3 in follicular atresia, stromelysin-3-deficient mice were studied. However, no difference in the pattern of apoptotic DNA fragmentation and no apparent morphological differences were observed when ovaries from wild-type and stromelysin-3-deficient mice were compared. Taken together, our data indicate that stromelysin-3 is induced during follicular atresia, but that this protease is not obligatory for initiation or completion of the atretic process.<newchar><newabs>11684441<newchar>Metalloproteases are important in many aspects of biology, ranging from cell proliferation, differentiation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) to vascularization and cell migration. These events occur several times during organogenesis in both normal development and during tumor progression. Mechanisms of metalloprotease action underlying these events include the proteolytic cleavage of growth factors so that they can become available to cells not in direct physical contact, degradation of the ECM so that founder cells can move across tissues into nearby stroma, and regulated receptor cleavage to terminate migratory signaling. Most of these processes require a delicate balance between the functions of matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) or metalloprotease-disintegrins (ADAMs) and natural tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases (TIMPs). In this review, we discuss recent progress in identifying an essential role for metalloproteases in axon outgrowth, as an example of a focal invasive event. We also discuss the evolving concept of how MMPs might regulate stem cell fate during tumor development.<newchar><newabs>10858278<newchar>Extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) occurs in inflammatory tissues. The celiac lesion in the small intestine is characterized by inflammation accompanied by profound morphological alterations. We used immunohistochemistry to determine the distribution of laminin, fibronectin, and tenascin isoforms in small intestinal biopsies of untreated patients with celiac disease. In normal mucosa, the distribution of laminin isoforms defines three epithelial basement membrane (BM) zones. We found that the organization of these zones was maintained in the celiac mucosa. Thus, components of laminin-5 (alpha3 and beta3) were found in the surface epithelial BM, laminin alpha2 chain was found selectively at crypt bottoms, and laminin alpha5 chain was the sole alpha-type chain in middle crypt BMs. Likewise, the distribution of fibronectin and tenascin resembled that of the normal gut. The organization of pericryptal fibroblasts and lamina propria smooth muscle strands, as defined by immunostaining for alpha-smooth muscle actin, also remained unchanged in the celiac mucosa. Unexpectedly, major ECM changes were not detected in the celiac lesion.<newchar><newabs>11114741<newchar>Engagement of integrin receptors with extracellular ligands gives rise to the formation of complex multiprotein structures that link the ECM to the cytoplasmic actin cytoskeleton. These adhesive complexes are dynamic, often heterogeneous structures, varying in size and organization. In motile cells, sites of adhesion within filopodia and lamellipodia are relatively small and transient and are referred to as 'focal complexes,' whereas adhesions underlying the body of the cell and localized to the ends of actin stress fibers are referred to as 'focal adhesions'. Signal transduction through focal complexes and focal adhesions has been implicated in the regulation of a number of key cellular processes, including growth factor induced mitogenic signals, cell survival and cell locomotion. The formation and remodeling of focal contacts is a dynamic process under the regulation of protein tyrosine kinases and small GTPases of the Rho family. In this review, we consider the role of the focal complex associated protein tyrosine kinase, Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK), in the regulation of cell movement with the emphasis on how FAK regulates the flow of signals from the ECM to the actin cytoskeleton.<newchar><newabs>10635313<newchar>During the progression of cancer invasion and metastasis, remodeling such as degradation of extracellular matrices (ECM) in cancer tissues and surrounding tissues is the most important event. Degradation of ECM modulates cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, and this changes cell behavior and the cell microenvironment. This review considers the cellular and organismal function of matrix metalloproteinases, especially of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases, and their inhibitor, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP).<newchar><newabs>10727639<newchar>An intricate balance between extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and degradation must be maintained during developmental tissue remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are the main mediators of ECM degradation. A subset of MMPs, referred to as membrane-type MMPs, contains a transmembrane domain that restricts protease activity at the cell surface. Membrane type-5 MMP is predominantly expressed in the brain. The present report is the first to demonstrate the temporal regulation and spatial distribution of MT5-MMP mRNA during nervous system development.<newchar><newabs>11359935<newchar>Cleft lip and palate syndromes are among the most common congenital malformations in humans. Mammalian palatogenesis is a complex process involving highly regulated interactions between epithelial and mesenchymal cells of the palate to permit correct positioning of the palatal shelves, the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM), and subsequent fusion of the palatal shelves. Here we show that several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), including a cell membrane-associated MMP (MT1-MMP) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) were highly expressed by the medial edge epithelium (MEE). MMP-13 was expressed both in MEE and in adjacent mesenchyme, whereas gelatinase A (MMP-2) was expressed by mesenchymal cells neighboring the MEE. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta3-deficient mice, which suffer from clefting of the secondary palate, showed complete absence of TIMP-2 in the midline and expressed significantly lower levels of MMP-13 and slightly reduced levels of MMP-2. In concordance with these findings, MMP-13 expression was strongly induced by TGF-beta3 in palatal fibroblasts. Finally, palatal shelves from prefusion wild-type mouse embryos cultured in the presence of a synthetic inhibitor of MMPs or excess of TIMP-2 failed to fuse and MEE cells did not transdifferentiate, phenocopying the defect of the TGF-beta3-deficient mice. Our observations indicate for the first time that the proteolytic degradation of the ECM by MMPs is a necessary step for palatal fusion.<newchar><newabs>18773889<newchar>Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) play an important role in the development of atherosclerosis and restenosis after angioplasty and coronary bypass grafting. The pathogenesis of these vascular diseases includes the abnormal production of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins by SMCs and their interactions with this newly synthesized and preexisting ECM. Litebamine, a natural phenanthrene alkaloid from the wood of Litsea cubeba, has been shown to inhibit platelet aggregation and thromboxane B(2) formation, suggesting its antithrombotic activity. In the present study we examined litebamine effects on vascular SMC adhesion and migration. Our results indicated that litebamine inhibited rat aortic SMCs (RASMCs) and A10 thoracic SMCs adhesion to collagen but not to other matrix proteins, suggesting its specificity on collagen. This inhibition was possibly resulted from that litebamine attenuated immobilized collagen-induced focal adhesion kinase (FAK) phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton reorganization in RASMCs, as determined by Western blotting and immunofluorescence microscopy. In a functional study, litebamine also inhibited platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced RASMC migration but did not affect PDGF-induced matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) secretion. Strikingly, among the tested kinases involved in PDGF-induced migration, only PDGF-induced phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K) activation was inhibited by litebamine. Taken together, we demonstrated here that litebamine can functionally inhibit vascular SMC adhesion and migration and elucidated its possible mechanisms of action. As SMC adhesion and migration are critical events in disease-related vascular remodeling, this compound may have beneficial effects in preventing cardiovascular diseases.<newchar><newabs>10686426<newchar>Macrophages (M&amp;phi;s) are multifunctional immune cells which are involved in the regulation of immune and inflammatory responses, as well as in tissue repair and remodeling. In tissues, M&amp;phi;s reside in areas which are rich in extracellular matrix (ECM), the structural component which also plays an essential role in regulating a variety of cellular functions. A major ECM protein encountered by M&amp;phi;s is type I collagen, the most abundant of the fibril-forming collagens. In this study, the adhesion of RAW 264.7 murine Mphis to native fibrillar, monomeric, and denatured type I collagen was investigated. Using atomic force microscopy, structural differences between fibrillar and monomeric type I collagen were clearly resolved. When cultured on fibrillar type I collagen, Mphis adhered poorly. In contrast, they adhered significantly to monomeric, heat-denatured, or collagenase-modified type I collagen. Studies utilizing anti-beta1 and -beta2 integrin adhesion-blocking antibodies, RGD-containing peptides, or divalent cation-free conditions did not inhibit Mphi; adhesion to monomeric or denatured type I collagen. However, macrophage scavenger receptor (MSR) ligands and anti-MSR antibodies significantly blocked Mphi; adhesion to denatured and monomeric type I collagen strongly suggesting the involvement of the MSR as an adhesion molecule for denatured type I collagen. Further analysis by Western blot identified the MSR as the primary receptor for denatured type I collagen among Mphi; proteins purified from a heat-denatured type I collagen affinity column. These findings indicate that Mphis adhere selectively to denatured forms of type I collagen, but not the native fibrillar conformation, via their scavenger receptors.<newchar><newabs>18385214<newchar>Vascular tissue engineering has emerged as a promising technology for the design of an ideal, responsive, living conduit with properties similar to that of native tissue. The missing link in tissue-engineered blood vessels is elastin biosynthesis. Several biomaterials are currently used but few support elastin biosynthesis in a 3-D array. In previous studies, we demonstrated that a hyaluronan-based scaffold (HYAFF-11) grafted in the infrarenal rat aorta successfully guided the complete regeneration of a well-functioning small-diameter (2 mm) neoartery. The aim of the present study was to test the ability of HYAFF-11 biodegradable grafts to develop into neovessels of larger size (4 mm) in a porcine model, focusing on extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and elastin biosynthesis. HYAFF-11 tubes (diameter 4 mm, length 5 cm) were implanted in an end-to-end fashion in the common carotid artery. Grafts were analyzed for patency with a Duplex scan every 15 days. ECM components were evaluated by histological and molecular biological methods. All the animals survived the observation period without complications. Intimal hyperplasia (initiating at the anastomotic site) and graft thrombosis led to 3 cases of partial or complete occlusion, as demonstrated by histological examination. There were no signs of stenoses or aneurysms in the remaining grafts. After 5 months, the biomaterial was almost completely degraded and replaced by a neoartery segment composed of mature smooth muscle cells, collagen, and elastin fibers organized in layers and was completely covered on the luminal surface by endothelial cells (vWF(+)). Whereas in previous small animal studies, patency rates were not optimal, those obtained in the present study using hyaluronan-based grafts of larger size confirmed the ability of these constructs to guide the development of a well-functioning neoartery, with the remarkable additional attribute of facilitating the formation of organized layers of elastin fibers.<newchar><newabs>19391484<newchar>Acute cellular rejection (ACR) may initiate chronic allograft dysfunction with alterations in the extracellular matrix compartment (ECM). Turnover of ECM proteins is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The aim of the present study was to determine the immunoexpression of MMP-2, MMP-9 and TIMP-2 in ACR, and to examine the relationship between expression of MMPs and monocytes/macrophages, transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFbeta-1), and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA). Immunoperoxidase study with antibodies against MMP-2, MMP-9, TIMP-2, CD68, TGFbeta-1 and alpha-SMA was carried out on 24 renal allograft biopsy specimens from patients with ACR and 11 allograft biopsy specimens from patients with no signs of rejection. Our study revealed increased immunoexpression of MMP-2, MMP-9 and TIM-2 in ACR as compared with controls, and significant positive correlations between immunostaining of MMP-2 and TGF-beta-1, as well as between MMP-2 and alpha-SMA. Increased immunoexpression of MMP-9 was positively correlated with alpha-SMA, and the number of interstitial CD68+cells. In conclusion our study supports a role of gelatinases in tissue damage in human renal acute cellular allograft rejection and provides some interesting insights into early renal remodeling which may lead to chronic allograft dysfunction.<newchar><newabs>17275272<newchar>Hyperthyroid patients develop left ventricular hypertrophy associated with alterations of several cardiac parameters such as heart rate, cardiac output, cardiac contraction and hemodynamic overload leading to cardiac complications. Although cardiac hypertrophy and contractile abnormality occur, interstitial fibrosis in the heart usually does not take place in hyperthyroid condition. Therefore, in the present study, the mechanism regulating myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in hyperthyroid condition was investigated. Cardiac hypertrophy was developed in Sprague-Dawley rats by administration of 3,5,3'-triiodo-L-thyronine (triiodothyronine, 8 microg/100g BW, ip, SID) and glucocorticosteroid, dexamethasone (DEX, 35 microg/100g BW, po, SID), which is also an inducer of hypertrophy for 15 days. Heart/Body weight ratio and atrial and brain natriuretic peptide mRNAs were significantly increased in both triiodothyronine- and DEX-treated rats compared to control. Collagens-I and -III deposition in the left ventricular sections was reduced in triiodothyronine-treated rats, whereas in DEX-treated animals those were increased compared to control. While mRNA and protein levels of procollagens-I and -III were increased with triiodothyronine (p&lt;0.01), the levels of mature collagens-I and -III were decreased. The levels of the mature collagens were increased with DEX compared to control. MMP-1 activity in the serum and left ventricle was higher with reduced levels of TIMPs-3 and -4 in the left ventricle of triiodothyronine-treated rats. The results suggest that accelerated breakdown of collagens-I and -III by MMP-1 due to suppression of the endogenous TIMPs plays an important role in regulating the ECM in myocardium of hyperthyroid rat.<newchar><newabs>10225475<newchar>Occlusive coronary artery disease is an important factor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The rupture of the thin fibrous cap of the atheroma may be one of the causes of acute coronary syndrome, however, the mechanism of formation of fibrous plaque are poorly understood. Elevation of plasma homocysteine, hyperhomocystinemia, H(e), has emerged as an independent risk factor for hypertension and fibrotic heart disease. The extracellular matrix (ECM) components, particularly fibrillar collagen, are elevated in the atherosclerotic lesions and are the essential integral element in holding the oxidized low density lipoproteins (LDL), homocystine, macrophage and foam cells in milieu, constituting the primary atherosclerotic and secondary restenotic lesions. In vivo and in vitro physiological, morphological, cellular, biochemical and molecular experiments have suggested the role of tissue homocystine in cardiovascular fibrosis and adverse ECM remodeling following H(e). The tissue homocystine induces cardiovascular fibrosis and may lead to heart failure via the redox-receptor pathway. The underlying cause and mechanism of cardiovascular fibrosis associated with arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis, hypertension and coronary heart disease, involve changes in the levels of tissue redox state.<newchar><newabs>17208203<newchar>Heparanase is an endoglycosidase that cleaves heparan sulfate in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and hence participates in ECM degradation and remodeling. Heparanase is involved in fundamental biological processes such as cancer metastasis, angiogenesis, and inflammation. Alternative splicing in the coding region of human heparanase was not reported. Here, we report the cloning of a splice variant of human heparanase that lacks exon 5 and is missing 174 bp compared to the wild-type cDNA. Splice 5 is expressed as a 55 kDa protein compared to the 65 and 50 kDa latent and active wild-type enzyme. Splice 5 was not detected in the incubation medium of tumor cells as opposed to the wild-type latent heparanase. Splice 5 escaped proteolytic cleavage, was devoid of HS degradation activity and exhibited diffused rather than granular cellular localization.<newchar><newabs>17107659<newchar>Differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) cells is regulated by many factors. Mechanical stress affects the healing and remodeling process of ACL after surgery in important ways. Besides, co-culture system had also showed the promise to induce MSCs toward different kinds of cells on current research. The purpose of this study was to investigate the gene expression of ACL cells' major extracellular matrix (ECM) component molecules of MSCs under three induction groups. In addition, to follow our previous study, cell electrophoresis technique and mRNA level gene expression of MSC protein were also used to analyze the differentiation of MSCs. The results reveal that specific regulatory signals which released from ACL cells appear to be responsible for supporting the selective differentiation toward ligament cells in co-culture system and mechanical stress promotes the secretion of key ligament ECM components. Therefore, the combined regulation could assist the development of healing and remolding of ACL tissue engineering. Furthermore, this study also verifies that cell electrophoresis could be used in investigation of cell differentiation. Importantly, analysis of the data suggests the feasibility of utilizing MSCs in clinical applications for repairing or regenerating ACL tissue.<newchar><newabs>16671339<newchar>Collagen metabolism in the extracellular matrix (ECM) is related to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular stiffness and remodeling in hypertension. We evaluated the association between collagen metabolism markers and the newly developed parameter, brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV), in older hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). We performed echocardiography and baPWV measurement using a new device, form PWV/ABI (Colin Medical Technology, Komaki, Japan), and measured plasma levels of markers of collagen metabolism such as procollagen type I C-terminal propeptide (PICP: a marker of collagen synthesis), collagen type I pyridinoline cross-linked C-terminal telopeptide (ICTP: a marker of collagen type I degradation), matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1: a marker of collagen degradation) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in 46 hypertensive patients with LVH. BaPWV was correlated with the plasma level of PICP (r=0.33, p=0.03) and ICTP (r=0.29, p=0.05) and the total TIMP-1/MMP-1 ratio (an index of collagen turnover; r=0.30, p=0.04). BaPWV was negatively correlated with the E/A ratio of left ventricular inflow (r=-0.36, p&lt;0.05), while baPWV was not correlated with left ventricular mass index (LVMI; r=-0.175, p=0.25) or deceleration time of the mitral E wave (DCT; r=0.15, p=0.31). The measures of hypertensive heart disease, such as the E/A ratio, DCT or LVMI were not correlated with any collagen markers in this study. In multiple regression analysis adjusted for confounding factors such as age, sex, pulse pressure, mean blood pressure, pulse rate, LVMI, E/A ratio and DCT, the positive correlation between baPWV and total TIMP-1/MMP-1 ratio remained significant (p&lt;0.05). In conclusion, arterial stiffness in high-risk older hypertensive patients may involve ECM collagen metabolism.<newchar><newabs>16728660<newchar>Apoptosis of smooth muscle cells (SMC) and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) have both been implicated in atherosclerotic plaque rupture. We have previously reported that degraded type I collagen fragments induce a rapid but transient apoptotic burst initiated by calpains in SMC. The aim of the current study was to identify the pathway responsible for consecutive SMC survival. We show that exposure of SMC to collagen fragments resulted in a sustained activation of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB via phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaBalpha. Its prevention through retroviral expression of superrepressor IkappaBalpha or proteasome inhibition potently induced apoptosis. In the presence of blocking antibodies to alpha(v)beta(3) integrin and RGD peptides, collagen fragments no longer activated NF-kappaB and apoptosis was enhanced. The mechanism by which NF-kappaB was protecting SMC against collagen fragment-induced apoptosis was a transcriptional activation of several endogenous caspase inhibitors of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family as: (1) the expression of xIAP, c-IAP2, and survivin was potently induced by collagen fragments; (2) IAP expression was abrogated by superrepressor IkappaBalpha; and (3) knockdown of each of the 3 IAPs by small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in enhanced apoptosis after collagen fragment treatment. Our data suggest that SMC exposed to degraded collagen are protected against apoptosis by a mechanism involving alpha(v)beta(3)-dependent NF-kappaB activation with consequent activation of IAPs. This may constitute a novel antiapoptotic pathway ensuring SMC survival in settings of enhanced ECM degradation such as cell migration, vascular remodeling, and atherosclerotic plaque rupture.<newchar><newabs>17172715<newchar>Reverse genetics is one strategy that is currently used to establish a link between a target gene and a disease phenotype. In this process, the function of a gene is inhibited and the consequence of its loss on a desired biological function, such as tumor growth and metastasis, is monitored. RNA interference (RNAi) has been found to be the most effective method to specifically inhibit gene expression. Notably, interactions between cancer cells, stromal cells, and the extracellular matrix (ECM) are crucial to angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. Tumor cells and the surrounding stroma are the principle source of growth factors and cytokines, which induce remodeling of the ECM mediated by metalloproteases (MMPs) secreted by macrophages. The production of macrophages is regulated by colony-stimulating factor (CSF)-1, which is overexpressed in several tumors. When short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting either the CSF-1 or its receptors were delivered into colon and breast cancer xenografts in mice, tumor growth was inhibited. Associated with this suppression, we observed decreased tumor vascularity, reduced expression of angiogenic factors and MMPs, and decreased macrophage recruitment to the tumors. The suppression of CSF-1 by RNA interference is therefore a powerful tool to block gene function and influence tumor-stroma interactions in solid tumor development.<newchar><newabs>16963791<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) protein receptors, or integrins, participate in vascular remodeling and the systemic myogenic response. Synthetic ligands and ECM fragments regulate the vascular smooth muscle cell contractile state by altering intracellular Ca2+ levels ([Ca2+]i). Information on the Ca2+ effect of integrins in vascular smooth muscle cells is limited, but nonexistent in pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells (PASMCs). We therefore characterized integrin expression in endothelium-denuded pulmonary arteries, and explored [Ca2+]i mobilization pathways induced by soluble ligands in rat PASMCs. Reverse transcriptase-PCR showed mRNA expression of integrins alpha1, alpha2, alpha3, alpha4, alpha5, alpha7, alpha8, alpha(v), beta1, beta3, and beta4, and immunoblots of alpha5, alpha(v), beta1, and beta3 confirmed protein expression. Exposure of PASMCs to integrin-binding peptides (0.5 mM) containing the arginine-glycine-aspartate (RGD) motif elicited [Ca2+]i responses with an order of potency of GRGDNP &gt; GRGDSP &gt; GRGDTP = cyclo-RGD. Pharmacological analysis revealed that the GRGDSP-induced Ca2+ response was unrelated to Ca2+ influx and the inositol triphosphate receptor-gated Ca2+ store, but partially blocked by ryanodine or inhibition of lysosome-related acidic organelles with bafilomycin A1. Simultaneous inhibition of both pathways was necessary to abolish the response. GRGDSP treatment increased cyclic ADP-ribose, the endogenous activator of ryanodine receptors, by 70%. GRGDSP also rapidly reduced Lysotracker Red accumulation, confirming direct modulation of acidic organelles. These data are the first demonstration of integrin-mediated Ca2+ regulation in PASMCs. The presence of an array of integrins, and activation of ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+ stores and lysosome-like organelles by GRGDSP suggest important roles for integrin-dependent Ca2+ signaling in regulating PASMC function.<newchar><newabs>16153722<newchar>Matrix-metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are able to degrade extra cellular matrix (ECM) components, are crucial in ECM-remodeling, under physiological (e.g., embryogenesis, wound healing, angiogenesis) or pathophysiological conditions (e.g., arthritis, cancer progression and metastasis, fibrosis). Treating HT1080 cells, a human fibrosarcoma cell line, with the iron chelator 2,2-Dipyridyl, which mimics certain aspects of hypoxia, leads to a 3-fold elevated Matrix-metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) protein level. This elevation occurs within 3 h, without any change of mRNA-concentration. The rapid increase in MMP-9 expression is caused by an enhancement of translational efficiency characterized by a recruitment of translationally inactive MMP-9 mRNP-complexes into the rough endoplasmatic reticulum (rER). Reporter gene assays, which depend on the untranslated regions (UTR) of MMP-9 mRNA, reveal that the posttranscriptional regulation is mainly attributed to the 3'UTR. RNA/protein interaction studies indicate that the elevated binding of nucleolin ( approximately 64 kDa form) to the 3'UTR may be of major importance for the increased efficiency of MMP-9 translation. The results show that MMP-9 expression can be regulated posttranscriptionally, affecting the efficiency of translation and localization of the mRNA.<newchar><newabs>17453002<newchar>Versican is a large chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan produced by several tumour cell types, including high-grade glioma. The increased expression of certain versican isoforms in the extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a role in tumour cell growth, adhesion and migration. Transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) is an important modulator of glioma invasion, partially by remodeling the ECM. However, it is unknown whether it interacts with versican during malignant progression of glioma cells. Here, we analysed the effect of TGF-beta2 on the expression of versican isoforms. The expression of versican V0/V1 was upregulated by TGF-beta2 detected by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and immunoprecipitation, whereas V2 was not induced. Using time-lapse scratch and spheroid migration assays, we observed that the glioma migration rate is significantly increased by exogenous TGF-beta2 and inhibited by TGF-beta2-specific antisense oligonucleotides. Interestingly, an antibody specific for the DPEAAE region of glycosaminoglycan-beta domain of versican was able to reverse the effect of TGF-beta2 on glioma migration in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together, we report here that TGF-beta2 triggers the malignant phenotype of high-grade gliomas by induction of migration, and that this effect is, at least in part, mediated by versican V0/V1.<newchar><newabs>18439917<newchar>Inflammation is a key process in cardiovascular diseases. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the vasculature is a major target of inflammatory cytokines, and TNFalpha regulates ECM metabolism by affecting collagen production. In this study, we have examined the pathways mediating TNFalpha-induced suppression of prolyl-4 hydroxylase alpha1 (P4Halpha1), the rate-limiting isoform of P4H responsible for procollagen hydroxylation, maturation, and organization. Using human aortic smooth muscle cells, we found that TNFalpha activated the MKK4-JNK1 pathway, which induced histone (H) 4 lysine 12 acetylation within the TNFalpha response element in the P4Halpha1 promoter. The acetylated-H4 then recruited a transcription factor, NonO, which, in turn, recruited HDACs and induced H3 lysine 9 deacetylation, thereby inhibiting transcription of the P4Halpha1 promoter. Furthermore, we found that TNFalpha oxidized DJ-1, which may be essential for the NonO-P4Halpha1 interaction because treatment with gene specific siRNA to knockout DJ-1 eliminated the TNFalpha-induced NonO-P4Halpha1 interaction and its suppression. Our findings may be relevant to aortic aneurysm and dissection and the stability of the fibrous cap of atherosclerotic plaque in which collagen metabolism is important in arterial remodeling. Defining this cytokine-mediated regulatory pathway may provide novel molecular targets for therapeutic intervention in preventing plaque rupture and acute coronary occlusion.<newchar><newabs>15627296<newchar>Oxidative stress defined as outbalanced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) than the existing antioxidative defense mechanisms plays an important role in tissue injury. Ischemia/reperfusion accompanied during organ transplantation is well- established oxidative stress-induced tissue injury. We hypothesized that oxidative stress may also play a role in the development and progression of chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN), since that ROS are major signaling molecules of growth factors and cytokines [platelet-derived growth factors, transforming growth factor-beta1(TGF-beta1)] upregulated in the kidney of CAN, that ROS in turn upregulate TGF-beta1, and that mycophenolic acid may inhibit features of CAN [proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation in vascular smooth muscle cells and glomerular mesangial cells] through inhibiting cellular ROS. Cellular ROS activate signal transduction cascade (protein kinase C, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and janus kinases) and transcription factors (nuclear factor-kappaB, activated protein-1, specificity protein 1, and signal transducers and activators of transcription) leading to regulation of genes and proteins involved in cellular proliferation, ECM remodeling, and apoptosis accompanied in CAN. This review is intended to provide an overview of oxidative stress in renal allograft nephropathy.<newchar><newabs>15726641<newchar>Liver regeneration depends on timely restoration of cellular mass while orchestrating structural matrix remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs) are known to regulate the extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and, more recently, the processing of growth factors and cytokines. We have previously demonstrated that TIMP-1 inhibits preneoplastic hepatocyte proliferation by attenuating growth factor bioavailability. In the present study, we examined the role of TIMP-1 in de novo hepatocyte cell division during liver regeneration. Comprehensive real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analyses of regenerating livers revealed significant inductions in the messenger RNA of TIMP-1, TIMP-3, TIMP-4, MMP-2, MMP-9, MMP-13, MMP-14, and MMP-24, while MMP-15 expression was significantly reduced. Induction of TIMP-1 occurred during the peak of hepatocyte DNA synthesis. Studies using genetically altered mice revealed that TIMP-1 loss of function accelerated hepatocyte cell cycle progression. This finding was demonstrated by earlier expression of cyclin D1, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and phosphorylated histone H3, which mark the G(1)-S, S, and M phase, respectively. Conversely, TIMP-1 gain of function delayed cell cycle progression. MMP activity was increased in the absence of Timp-1. Examination of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and its receptor Met, both of which provide a mitogenic signal for hepatocyte division, showed increased HGF activity in Timp-1(-/-)-regenerating livers. HGF is released from the ECM and is proteolytically processed to its active form. Active HGF was elevated in Timp-1(-/-) mice, leading to increased immunostaining of phosphorylated Met as well as activation of a downstream effector, p38. In conclusion, TIMP-1 is a novel negative regulator of HGF activity during liver regeneration.<newchar><newabs>15208034<newchar>We investigated the involvement of fibronectin (FN) in Trypanosoma cruzi-cardiomyocyte invasion and the extracellular matrix (ECM) components expression during T. cruzi infection in vivo and in vitro. Treatment of trypomastigotes with FN or a synthetic peptide (MRGDS) prior to cardiomyocyte interaction reduced T. cruzi infection, indicating that FN mediates the parasite invasion through its RGD sequence. In murine experimental Chagas' disease, an enhancement of the ECM components was detected in the myocardium during the late acute infection, coinciding with inflammatory infiltrates accumulation. In contrast, highly infected cardiomyocytes displayed a reduction in FN expression in vitro, while laminin spatial distribution was altered. Although it has been demonstrated that cardiomyocytes are able to synthesize cytokines upon T. cruzi infection, our data suggest that matrix remodeling is dependent on cytokines secreted by inflammatory cells recruited in immune response.<newchar><newabs>15048879<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is involved in many cellular properties such as division, migration, differentiation, and death. The turnover of ECM is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the MMPs are inhibited by the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). In this study, the transcriptional regulation of the TIMP-1 promoter was investigated. The 5'-deletion assay showed that the region between -1,200 and -1,101 was responsible for the TIMP-1 promoter activity. The mutations of the two Sp1 sites in this region reduced the transcription activity. In addition, the co-transfection with antisense Sp1 oligonucleotide decreased the promoter activity, suggesting that the transcription of the TIMP-1 promoter is mediated by Sp1. Previously, it was reported that the TIMP-1 expression was enhanced under hypoxia. Therefore, the TIMP-1 promoter activity was investigated with or without cobalt ion, which elicits the same physiological effect as hypoxia. The results showed that the TIMP-1 promoter was induced in the presence of cobalt ion and that the promoter activity was regulated by Sp1 as well as HIF-1. Therefore, this study suggests that Sp1 is involved in the regulation of the TIMP-1 promoter in the presence of cobalt ion as well as in the basal level transcription.<newchar><newabs>16941590<newchar>Simple and effective biocompatible materials that mimic the natural extracellular matrix (ECM) were developed for a variety of uses in regenerative medicine. These synthetic ECMs (sECMs) were designed to recapitulate the minimal composition required to obtain functional ECMs. The sECM components are crosslinkable in situ, and may be seeded with cells prior to injection in vivo, without compromising either the cells or the recipient tissues. Several sECM compositions were evaluated to establish which formulation would be most beneficial for cell growth and tissue remodeling. Three natural ECM macromonomeric building blocks were employed: hyaluronan (HA), chondroitin sulfate (CS), and gelatin (Gtn). The carboxyl-rich glycosaminoglycans and Gtn were each chemically modified to give the corresponding thiolated dithiopropionylhydrazide (DTPH) derivatives (CS-DTPH, HA-DTPH, and Gtn-DTPH). Different compositions of CS-Gtn and HA-Gtn hydrogels were fabricated by crosslinking the thiolated biomacromonomers with polyethylene glycol diacrylate. Each sECM had high water content (&gt;96%), biologically suitable mechanical properties, and a useful gelation time ( approximately 2-6 min). The bioerosion rates for the sECMs were determined, and a given composition could be selected to meet the requirements of a given clinical application. Both the HA-Gtn and CS-Gtn sECM hydrogels supported cell growth and proliferation with cultured murine fibroblasts in vitro. Moreover, subcutaneous injection of a suspension of murine fibroblasts in each of the two sECM hydrogels into nude mice in vivo resulted in the formation of viable and uniform soft tissue in vivo.<newchar><newabs>15320789<newchar>A novel human plasma protein was found in the eluate from the dextran sulfate column, which was used for the treatment of the patients with hypercholesteremia to reduce plasma low density lipoprotein. The results of sequence analysis revealed that this protein was a homologue of heavy chains of inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (ITI) family, and it was termed IHRP (ITI family heavy chain related protein). IHRP was identified as an acute-phase protein in animals, and slightly increased concentrations in human plasmas were observed in the patients with inflammatory disorders. IHRP bound to actin and inhibited its polymerization, and IHRP suppressed the phagocytosis and chemotaxis of polymorphonuclear cells. These results suggest that IHRP may function as an anti-inflammatory protein. Plasma hyaluronan binding protein (PHBP) is a novel serine protease which was also found in human plasma. It is consisted of three epidermal growth factor domains, one kringle domain and one serine protease domain from its amino terminus. The amino acid sequence of PHBP is homologous to that of hepatocyte growth factor activator. Purified 75-kDa single chain pro-form of PHBP was auto-activated (auto-cleaved) to 50-kDa heavy chain and 25-kDa light chain, both of them are bridged by a disulfied bond. PHBP digested alpha-chain and beta-chain of fibrinogen to prevent coagulation and cleaved single chain urokinase type plasminogen activator (scuPA) to the active hetero dimer form (tcuPA). The auto-activation of PHBP was accelerated in the presence of dextran sulfate or phosphatidylethanolamine as well as factor XII of the coagulation system. C1 inhibitor of the complement system was identified as the main inhibitor of PHBP in human plasma. Partial hepatectomy and administration of carbon tetrachloride or galactosamine caused the conversion of pro-PHBP to the active form in mouse but administrations of turpentine and mercury chloride did not, suggesting the hepatic injury specific activation of PHBP. These results indicate that PHBP participates not only in the fibrinolytic system but also in the degradation cascade of extracellular matrix (ECM), i.e., PHBP activates scuPA to tcuPA, tcuPA activates matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) and activated MMPs degrade ECM for the tissue remodeling after hepatic injury.<newchar><newabs>16023011<newchar>Recent studies have revealed that following injuries, ligament tissues such as anterior cruciate ligaments (ACL), release large amounts of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). These enzymes have a devastating effect on the healing process of the injured ligaments. Although these enzymes are produced following ligament injuries, because of different healing capacities seen between the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and ACL, we were curious to find if the MMP activity was expressed and modulated differently in these tissues. For this purpose ACL and MCL fibroblasts were seeded on equi-biaxial stretch chambers and were stretched in different levels. The stretched cells were assayed using Zymography, Western Blot and global MMP activity assays. The results showed that within 72 h after injurious stretch, production of 72 kD pro-MMP-2 increased in both ACL and MCL. However, the ACL fibroblasts generated significantly more pro-MMP-2 than the MCL fibroblasts. Furthermore we found in ACL pro-MMP-2 was converted more into active form. With 4-aminophenyl mercuric acetate (APMA) treatment, large amounts of pro-MMP-2 were converted into active form in both. This indicates that there is no significant difference between ACL and MCL fibroblasts in post-translational modification of MMP-2. The fluorescent MMP activity assays revealed that the MMP family activities were higher in the injured ACL fibroblasts than the MCL. Since the MMPs are critically involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover, these findings may explain one of the reasons why the injured ACL hardly repairs. The higher levels of active MMP-2 seen in the ACL injuries may disrupt the delicate balance of ECM remodeling process. These results suggest that the generation and modulation of MMP-2 may be directly involved in the different responses seen in ACL and MCL injuries.<newchar><newabs>15706410<newchar>Colorectal cancer is the second most deadly cancer in the United States. When diagnosed early, current treatments bring a limited success; however, once metastasis occurs, radiation and chemotherapy are generally ineffective. Structural changes in the ECM are necessary for cell migration during tissue remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), VEGF, Ki-67 (proliferative protein), and constituents of ECM, such as fibronectin, play a critical role in angiogenesis and are thus crucial in neoplastic invasion and metastasis. Based on antitumor properties of certain nutrients, we investigated the effect of a diet containing lysine, proline, arginine, ascorbic acid, and green tea extract (NM) on the growth of tumors, induced by implanting human colon HCT 116 cancer cells in athymic nude mice, and the expression of MMPs, VEGF, Ki-67 and fibronectin in these tumors, as well as the production of mucin (by PAS staining). After one week of isolation, 5 to 6 week-old athymic male nude mice (n=12) were inoculated with 3x10(6) colon cancer HCT 116 cells. After injection, the mice were randomly divided into 2 groups; group A was fed a regular diet and group B was fed a regular diet supplemented with 0.5% NM. The mice were sacrificed 4 weeks later, and their tumors were excised, weighed, and processed for histology. Results showed that the nutrient mixture (NM) inhibited growth and reduced the size of tumors in nude mice. Furthermore, histological evaluation revealed increased mitotic index, MMP-9 and VEGF secretion and reduced basement membrane in the control group tissues. Nutrient supplementation strongly suppressed the growth of tumors without any adverse effects in nude mice, suggesting the nutrient combination has potential as an anticancer agent. Histological studies supported these findings by showing inhibition of MMP-9 and VEGF secretion and mitotic index, which are critical parameters for cancer control and prevention.<newchar><newabs>15381110<newchar>The human kallikrein family is a group of 15 serine protease genes clustered on chromosome 19q13.4 and shares a high degree of homology. These proteolytic enzymes have diverse physiological functions in many different tissues. Growing evidence suggests that many kallikreins are differentially expressed in cancer and may play a role in metastasis. Human kallikrein gene 13 (KLK13) is a member of this family and codes for a trypsin-like, secreted serine protease (hK13) that is overexpressed in ovarian cancer patients. The aim of this study was to determine if hK13 can degrade extracellular matrix components. Recombinant hK13 was produced in yeast and purified using cation exchange and reverse-phase chromatography. The protein was used as an immunogen to generate mouse monoclonal antibodies. Enzymatic activity of hK13 was verified by using synthetic tri-peptide fluorogenic substrates and gelatin zymography. Active hK13 was incubated with biotinylated extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and degradation was evaluated by Western blot analysis. hK13-secreting cancer cell lines were treated in a chemotaxis invasion chamber that was coated with various ECM proteins, to determine if hK13 plays a role in tumor cell migration and invasion. Assay with the synthetic substrates and zymography have shown that recombinant hK13 was enzymatically active. The Western blot results showed that hK13 was able to cleave the major components of the extracellular matrix. In the chemotaxis invasion chamber experiment, it was found that ovarian cancer cell lines that secreted hK13 and were treated with an hK13 neutralizing antibody migrated less than untreated cells. Human kallikrein13 may play a role in tissue remodeling and/or tumor invasion and metastasis. Targeting hK13 activity with neutralizing antibodies may have therapeutic applications.<newchar><newabs>15690491<newchar>Reelin is a glycoprotein that plays a critical role in brain development, including proper cortical lamination. In adult animals, reelin continues to be expressed in different neuronal populations in many brain regions. We performed labeling for reelin immunoreactivity (-i) in post-mortem cerebral cortex from five adults and two fetuses with three different antibodies. The tissue was then processed for light and electron microscopy. In cell bodies, reelin-i was found in pyramidal and nonpyramidal neurons on the outer nuclear membrane, rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER), and ribosomes. In dendrites, labeling was found in the rER and ribosomes and was diffusely distributed in spines. In the neuropil, diffuse labeling was seen in small axon terminals and unmyelinated axons, and the postsynaptic density (PSD) frequently had discrete labeling. Reelin-i was also found in glial somata and in small astrocytic processes. With rare exceptions, reelin-i in the adult was conspicuously absent from both the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the subcellular organelles, where secreted proteins are modified and taken back into the cell. Labeling in fetal cortex was similar to that in the adult except for prominent labeling in the ECM. The presence of reelin in adult spines, PSD, and terminals suggests that in the adult human reelin has a role in synaptic remodeling, which is consistent with the evidence for its role in long-term potentiation in the adult brain.<newchar><newabs>11673245<newchar>All mammalian uteri contain endometrial glands that synthesize or transport and secrete substances essential for survival and development of the conceptus (embryo/fetus and associated extraembryonic membranes). In rodents, uterine secretory products of the endometrial glands are unequivocally required for establishment of uterine receptivity and conceptus implantation. Analyses of the ovine uterine gland knockout model support a primary role for endometrial glands and, by default, their secretions in peri-implantation conceptus survival and development. Uterine adenogenesis is the process whereby endometrial glands develop. In humans, this process begins in the fetus, continues postnatally, and is completed during puberty. In contrast, endometrial adenogenesis is primarily a postnatal event in sheep, pigs, and rodents. Typically, endometrial adenogenesis involves differentiation and budding of glandular epithelium from luminal epithelium, followed by invagination and extensive tubular coiling and branching morphogenesis throughout the uterine stroma to the myometrium. This process requires site-specific alterations in cell proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling as well as paracrine cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions that support the actions of specific hormones and growth factors. Studies of uterine development in neonatal ungulates implicate prolactin, estradiol-17 beta, and their receptors in mechanisms regulating endometrial adenogenesis. These same hormones appear to regulate endometrial gland morphogenesis in menstruating primates and humans during reconstruction of the functionalis from the basalis endometrium after menses. In sheep and pigs, extensive endometrial gland hyperplasia and hypertrophy occur during gestation, presumably to provide increasing histotrophic support for conceptus growth and development. In the rabbit, sheep, and pig, a servomechanism is proposed to regulate endometrial gland development and differentiated function during pregnancy that involves sequential actions of ovarian steroid hormones, pregnancy recognition signals, and lactogenic hormones from the pituitary or placenta. That disruption of uterine development during critical organizational periods can alter the functional capacity and embryotrophic potential of the adult uterus reinforces the importance of understanding the developmental biology of uterine glands. Unexplained high rates of peri-implantation embryonic loss in humans and livestock may reflect defects in endometrial gland morphogenesis due to genetic errors, epigenetic influences of endocrine disruptors, and pathological lesions.<newchar><newabs>12475802<newchar>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a lung disease that is characterized by epithelial cell damage and areas of denuded basement membrane resulting in inflammation, fibroblast proliferation, excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, and remodeling of alveolar gas exchange units. The progressive loss of lung gas exchange units in patients with IPF leads to respiratory failure and eventually to death. While the etiology of this disease is unknown, for many years studies suggested that chronic inflammation was the underlying factor that caused fibroproliferation and structural alterations of the lung. Recent data show that fibroproliferation and fibrosis can occur independently of inflammation, suggesting that IPF is a disease caused by a mesenchymal, rather than an immune disorder. Mesenchymal growth factors, including transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, platelet-derived growth factor, connective tissue growth factor, fibroblast growth factors, and keratinocyte growth factors, as well as proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta, have been shown to be exaggerated in several fibrotic lung disorders including IPF, ARDS, sarcoidosis, and bronchopulmonary dysplasia, as well as pulmonary manifestations of systemic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or progressive systemic sclerosis (scleroderma). We argue that inflammation is required to initiate growth factor production and repair of the damaged alveolar epithelial lining in fibrotic lung diseases and that exaggerated TGF-beta production may be responsible for the fibrotic response seen in diseases such as IPF. We recognize the potential role of several growth factors in the fibroproliferative process in the lung, and in this brief report we focus on the possible roles of the growth factors IGF-I and TGF-beta in cell migration, proliferation, and ECM synthesis in patients with IPF.<newchar><newabs>11729749<newchar>The liver lobule is formed by parenchymal cells, i.e., hepatocytes and nonparenchymal cells. In contrast to hepatocytes that occupy almost 80% of the total liver volume and perform the majority of numerous liver functions, nonparenchymal liver cells, which contribute only 6.5% to the liver volume, but 40% to the total number of liver cells, are localized in the sinusoidal compartment of the tissue. The walls of hepatic sinusoid are lined by three different cell types: sinusoidal endothelial cells (SEC), Kupffer cells (KC), and hepatic stellate cells (HSC, formerly known as fat-storing cells, Ito cells, lipocytes, perisinusoidal cells, or vitamin A-rich cells). Additionally, intrahepatic lymphocytes (IHL), including pit cells, i.e., liver-specific natural killer cells, are often present in the sinusoidal lumen. It has been increasingly recognized that both under normal and pathological conditions, many hepatocyte functions are regulated by substances released from neighboring nonparenchymal cells. Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells constitute the lining or wall of the hepatic sinusoid. They perform important filtration function due to the presence of small fenestrations that allow free diffusion of many substances, but not of particles of the size of chylomicrons, between the blood and the hepatocyte surface. SEC show huge endocytic capacity for many ligands including glycoproteins, components of the extracellular matrix (ECM; such as hyaluronate, collagen fragments, fibronectin, or chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan), immune complexes, transferrin and ceruloplasmin. SEC may function as antigen-presenting cells (APC) in the context of both MHC-I and MHC-II restriction with the resulting development of antigen-specific T-cell tolerance. They are also active in the secretion of cytokines, eicosanoids (i.e., prostanoids and leukotrienes), endothelin-1, nitric oxide, and some ECM components. Kupffer cells are intrasinusoidally located tissue macrophages with a pronounced endocytic and phagocytic capacity. They are in constant contact with gut-derived particulate materials and soluble bacterial products so that a subthreshold level of their activation in the normal liver may be anticipated. Hepatic macrophages secrete potent mediators of the inflammatory response (reactive oxygen species, eicosanoids, nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, TNF-alpha, and other cytokines), and thus control the early phase of liver inflammation, playing an important part in innate immune defense. High exposure of Kupffer cells to bacterial products, especially endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS), can lead to the intensive production of inflammatory mediators, and ultimately to liver injury. Besides typical macrophage activities, Kupffer cells play an important role in the clearance of senescent and damaged erythrocytes. Liver macrophages modulate immune responses via antigen presentation, suppression of T-cell activation by antigen-presenting sinusoidal endothelial cells via paracrine actions of IL-10, prostanoids, and TNF-alpha, and participation in the development of oral tolerance to bacterial superantigens. Moreover, during liver injury and inflammation, Kupffer cells secrete enzymes and cytokines that may damage hepatocytes, and are active in the remodeling of extracellular matrix. Hepatic stellate cells are present in the perisinusoidal space. They are characterized by abundance of intracytoplasmic fat droplets and the presence of well-branched cytoplasmic processes, which embrace endothelial cells and provide focally a double lining for sinusoid. In the normal liver HSC store vitamin A, control turnover of extracellular matrix, and regulate the contractility of sinusoids. Acute damage to hepatocytes activates transformation of quiescent stellate cells into myofibroblast-like cells that play a key role in the development of inflammatory fibrotic response. Pit cells represent a liver-associated population of large granular lymphocytes, i.e., natural killer (NK) cells. They spontaneously kill a variety of tumor cells in an MHC-unrestricted way, and this antitumor activity may be enhanced by the secretion of interferon-gamma. Besides pit cells, the adult liver contains other subpopulations of lymphocytes such as gamma delta T cells, and both &quot;conventional&quot; and &quot;unconventional&quot; alpha beta T cells, the latter containing liver-specific NK T cells. The development of methods for the isolation and culture of main liver cell types allowed to demonstrate that both nonparenchymal and parenchymal cells secrete tens of mediators that exert multiple paracrine and autocrine actions. Co-culture experiments and analyses of the effects of conditioned media on cultures of another liver cell type have enabled the identification of many substances released from non-parenchymal liver cells that evidently regulate some important functions of neighboring hepatocytes and non-hepatocytes. To the key mediators involved in the intercellular communication in the liver belong prostanoids, nitric oxide, endothelin-1, TNF-alpha, interleukins, and chemokines, many growth factors (TGF-beta, PDGF, IGF-I, HGF), and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Paradoxically, the cooperation of liver cells is better understood under some pathological conditions (i.e., in experimental models of liver injury) than in normal liver due to the possibility of comparing cellular phenotype under in vivo and in vitro conditions with the functions of the injured organ. The regulation of vitamin A metabolism provides an example of the physiological role for cellular cross-talk in the normal liver. The majority (up to 80%) of the total body vitamin A is stored in the liver as long-chain fatty acid esters of retinal, serving as the main source of retinoids that are utilized by all tissues throughout the body. Hepatocytes are directly involved in the uptake from blood of chylomicron remnants, and the synthesis of retinol-binding protein that transfers retinol to other tissues. However, more than 80% of the liver retinoids are stored in lipid droplets of hepatic stellate cells. HSC are capable of both uptake and release of retinol depending on the body's retinol status. The activity of some major enzymes of vitamin A metabolism have been found to be many times higher per protein basis in stellate cells than in hepatocytes. Despite progress in the understanding of the roles played by these two cell types in hepatic retinoid metabolism, the way in which retinoids move between the parenchymal cells, stellate cells, and blood plasma has not been fully elucidated. Sinusoidal blood flow is, to a great extent, regulated by hepatic stellate cells that can contract due to the presence of smooth muscle alpha-actin. The main vasoactive substances that affect constriction or relaxation of HSC derive both from distant sources and from neighboring hepatocytes (carbon monoxide, leukotrienes), endothelial cells (endothelin, nitric oxide, prostaglandins), Kupffer cells (prostaglandins, NO), and stellate cells themselves (endothelin, NO). The cellular cross-talk reflected by the fine-tuned modulation of sinusoidal contraction becomes disturbed under pathological conditions, such as endotoxemia or liver fibrosis, through the excess synthesis of vasoregulatory compounds and the involvement of additional mediators acting in a paracrine way. The liver is an important source of some growth factors and growth factor-binding proteins. Although hepatocytes synthesize the bulk of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), also other types of nonparenchymal liver cells may produce this peptide. Cell-specific expression of distinct IGF-binding proteins observed in the rat and human liver provides the potential for specific regulation of hepatic IGF-I synthesis not only by growth hormone, insulin, and IGF-I, but also by cytokines released from activated Kupffer (IL-1, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta) or stellate cells (TGF-alpha, TGF-beta). Hepatic stellate cells may affect turnover of hepatocytes through the synthesis of potent positive as well as negative signals such as, respectively, hepatocyte-growth-factor or TGF-beta. Although hepatocytes seem not to produce TGF-beta, a pleiotropic cytokine synthesized and secreted in the latent form by Kupffer and stellate cells, they may contribute to its actions in the liver by the intracellular activation of latent TGF-beta, and secretion of the biologically active isoform. Many mediators that reach the liver during inflammatory processes, such as endotoxins, immune-complexes, anaphylatoxins, and PAF, increase glucose output in the perfused liver, but fail to do so in isolated hepatocytes, acting indirectly via prostaglandins released from Kupffer cells. In the liver, prostaglandins synthesized from arachidonic acid mainly in Kupffer cells in a response to various inflammatory stimuli, modulate hepatic glucose metabolism by increasing glycogenolysis in adjacent hepatocytes. The release of glucose from glycogen supports the increased demand for energetic fuel by the inflammatory cells such as leukocytes, and additionally enables enhanced glucose turnover in sinusoidal endothelial cells and Kupffer cells which is necessary for effective defense of these cells against invading microorganisms and oxidative stress in the liver. Leukotrienes, another oxidation product of arachidonic acid, have vasoconstrictive, cholestatic, and metabolic effects in the liver. A transcellular synthesis of cysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4) functions in the liver: LTA4, an important intermediate, is synthesized in Kupffer cells, taken up by hepatocytes, converted into the potent LTC4, and then released into extracellular space, acting in a paracrine way on Kupffer and sinusoidal endothelial cells. Thus, hepatocytes are target cells for the action of eicosanoids and the site of their transformation and degradation, but can not directly oxidate arachidonic acid to eicosanoids. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)<newchar><newabs>15004420<newchar>Cultured hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are known to change their morphology and function with respect to the production of extracellular matrices (ECMs) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in response to ECM components. We examined the regulatory role of the native form of type I collagen fibrils in pro-MMP-2 production and activation in cultured HSCs. Gelatin zymography of the conditioned media revealed that pro- and active form of MMP-2 was increased in the HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel but not on type I collagen-coated surface, gelatin-coated surface, type IV collagen-coated surface, or Matrigel, suggesting the importance of the native form of type I collagen fibrils in pro-MMP-2 production and activation. The induction of active MMP-2 by extracellular type I collagen was suppressed by the blocking antibody against integrin beta1 subunits, indicating the involvement of integrin signaling in pro-MMP-2 activation. RT-PCR analysis indicated that MMP-2, membrane type-1 MMP (MT1-MMP) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) mRNA levels were elevated in HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. The increased MT1-MMP proteins were localized on the cell surface of HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. In contrast to the expression of MMP-2, HSCs showed a great decline in MMP-13 expression in HSCs cultured on type I collagen gel. These results indicate that the native fibrillar (polymerized) but not monomeric form of type I collagen induced pro-MMP-2 production and activation through MT1-MMP and TIMP-2 in cultured HSCs, suggesting an important role of HSCs in ECM remodeling in the hepatic perisinusoidal spaces.<newchar><newabs>14624521<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds isolated from valvulated conduits can be useful in developing durable bioprostheses by tissue engineering provided that anatomical shape, architecture, and mechanical properties are preserved. As evidenced by SEM, intact scaffolds were derived from porcine aortic valves by the combined use of Triton X-100 and cholate (TRI-COL) or N-cetylpyridinium (CPC) and subsequent nucleic acid removal by nuclease. Both treatments were effective in removing most cells and all the cytomembranes, with preservation of (1) endothelium basal membranes, (2) ECM texture, including the D-periodical interaction of small proteoglycans with normally D-banded collagen fibrils, and (3) mechanical properties of the treated valves. Ultrastructural features agreed with DNA, hexosamine, and uronic acid biochemical estimations. Calcification potential, assessed by a 6-week rat subdermal model, was significantly reduced by TRI-COL/nuclease treatment. This was not true for CPC only, despite better proteoglycan preservation, suggesting that nucleic acids also are involved in calcification onset. Human fibroblasts, used to repopulate TRI-COL samples, formed mono- or multilayers on surfaces, and groups of cells also were scattered within the valve leaflet framework. A biocompatible scaffolds of this kind holds promise for production of durable valve bioprostheses that will be able to undergo probable turnover and/or remodeling by repopulating recipient cells.<newchar><newabs>14663480<newchar>A variety of factors cooperate to regulate neovessel formation and persistence. Proangiogenic growth factors have remained an area of intense interest due to their capacity to promote endothelial cell (EC) proliferation and to initiate the angiogenic program. These growth factors are associated with increased cell survival, yet paradoxically, angiogenic ECs are more susceptible to apoptosis than quiescent ECs. Survival is regulated by cooperation between growth factor receptors and integrins, which are in turn governed by the composition of the local extracellular matrix (ECM). Integrin-mediated signaling is altered or disrupted by the presence of soluble, rather than matrix-bound ligands, thus providing a means by which ECM remodeling can influence both integrin- and growth factor-mediated events. Ultimately, the collaboration of these factors determines whether ECs survive or die, thereby regulating neovascularization.<newchar><newabs>12951508<newchar>The tissue inhibitor of the metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) gene was isolated as a gene involved in the process of ascorbate-induced differentiation of mouse MC3T3-E1 cells by the differential display method. The functional roles of TIMP-3 were characterized by establishing stable cell lines, which constitutively expressed the TIMP-3 gene. The TIMP-3 transfectants produced type I collagen at the same level as that of normal cells in response to ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (AscP). However, the expression of the other osteoblastic marker proteins such as alkaline phosphatase (ALPase), osteopontin (OP), osteocalcin (OC), osteonectin (ON) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) remained at a low level even in the presence of AscP. Furthermore, no mineralization of the extracellular matrix (ECM) occurred with the transfectants. Remodeling ECM through TIMPs and MMPs is concluded to be required for osteoblastic differentiation.<newchar><newabs>11440621<newchar>Pathologic lesions caused by catheter-based revascularization procedures for occlusive artery disease include disruption of the endothelium, exposure of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells, which lead to neointima formation and restenosis. We have developed matrix-collagen-targeted retroviral vectors that are able to accumulate at sites of vascular injury (Hall et al., Hum. Gene Ther. 1997;8:2183-2192; Hall et al., Hum. Gene Ther. 2000;11:983-993). The primary tissue-targeting motif, adapted from the physiological surveillance sequence found in von Willebrand factor, served to localize and concentrate the vector within vascular lesions. In the present study, we evaluated the efficiency of this vector-targeting system in rats with nonligated balloon-injured carotid arteries. Both intraarterial (by retrograde femoral artery catheterization) and intravenous (via femoral vein) injection of a matrix-targeted vector enhanced transduction of neointimal cells ( approximately 20%) at severely denuded areas when compared with the nontargeted vector (&lt;1%). Further, intraarterial instillation of a matrix-targeted, but not a nontargeted, vector bearing an antisense cyclin G1 construct inhibited neointima lesion formation in the injured carotid arteries. Taken together, these data indicate that strategic targeting of retroviral vectors to vascular lesions would have therapeutic potential in the management of vascular restenosis and many other disorders of uncontrolled proliferation where endothelial disruption, ECM remodeling, and collagen deposition form the nexus for preferential vector localization and concentration in vivo.<newchar><newabs>16146744<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteolytic enzymes important in the degradation and turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. MMPs and their inhibitors play major roles not only in ECM degradation but also in mediating cell-cell adhesion, cell migration and invasion, cell proliferation and apoptosis, tissue remodeling, and growth factor and cytokine signaling. There is a vast amount of literature regarding changes in MMPs and MMP inhibitor levels during the progression of cardiovascular diseases but a paucity of information regarding their roles in the embryonic cardiovascular development. Yet, by studying cardiovascular development, much can be learned with regard to the pathophysiology and etiology of adult cardiovascular diseases. In fact, the development of many pathological conditions may reflect inappropriate recapitulation of embryonic events. The objective of this review is to provide an overview of what is known regarding the role of MMPs and their inhibitors during embryonic cardiovascular development and to relate these to the pathophysiology of adult cardiovascular diseases whenever possible.<newchar><newabs>11877466<newchar>Mesangial cells maintain normal glomerular function by mediating ECM remodeling and immune complex disposal. We have recently identified megsin, a novel member of the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) superfamily predominantly expressed in the mesangium. While our previous studies suggested a role for megsin in the pathogenesis of human glomerular diseases, its exact biological significance remained unknown. Here we produced two lines of megsin transgenic mice. Overexpression of megsin led to progressive mesangial matrix expansion and an increase in the number of mesangial cells. These glomerular lesions were accompanied by an augmented immune complex deposition, together with Ig's and complement. Binding and functional assays in vitro identified plasmin as one biological substrate of megsin and confirmed its activity as a proteinase inhibitor. Transgenic animals exhibiting nephritis as a result of treatment with anti--glomerular basement membrane antiserum showed significantly more persistent expansion of the mesangial ECM than was seen in parental mice. Megsin therefore exerts a biologically relevant influence on mesangial function, and on the mesangial microenvironment, such that simple overexpression of this endogenous serpin engenders elementary mesangial lesions.<newchar><newabs>17402704<newchar>Hydrogels derived from synthetic polymers have been previously engineered to degrade under the activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). It is believed that these systems can act as extracellular-matrix (ECM) equivalents mimicking the degradation and remodeling of the ECM through the activity of cell-secreted enzymes. In this study, MMP-sensitive hydrogels derived from dextran were developed. In order to avoid the incorporation of hydrolyzable esters often introduced in dextran modification strategies, the polysaccharide was modified with p-maleimidophenyl isocyanate (PMPI) thereby introducing maleimide functionalities in the backbone and resulting in dextran derivatized with p-maleimidophenyl isocyanate (Dex-PMPI). This strategy was favored to separate out the effects of random hydrolysis and enzymatic digestion in the degradation of the dextran hydrogels. A peptide cross-linker, derived from collagen and susceptible to gelatinase A (MMP-2) digestion, was synthesized with bifunctional cysteine termini and used to cross-link the Dex-PMPI. These hydrogels were found to be hydrolytically stable for more than 200 days yet degraded either within 30 h when exposed to bacterial collagenase or within 16 days when exposed to human MMP-2, demonstrating enzymatic-mediated digestion of the peptide cross-links. Further modification of the cross-linked hydrogels with laminin-derived peptides enhanced cell adhesion and survival, demonstrating the potential of these materials for use in tissue engineering applications.<newchar><newabs>11115618<newchar>Neointima formation after arterial de-endothelialization refers not only to smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration and proliferation, but also involves extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism. Most studies regarding the role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) in neointima have focused on the early phase of vascular remodeling. In this study, we examined the expression of MMP and TIMP in rabbit aortic neointima at a relatively late stage of lesion development, between 4 and 12 weeks after initial de-endothelialization. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of steady-state MMP-9 mRNA was increased up to the 4th week and MMP-2 mRNA to the 12th week after de-endothelialization. In situ hybridization shown that MMP positive cells were predominantly distributed in arterial neointima. Expression of TIMP-1 mRNA was continuously up-regulated up to the 12th week and TIMP-1 positive cells, primarily SMCs, were also localized to the neointimal tissue. Alteration at mRNA level was accompanied by that at protein level, as assessed by SDS-PAGE zymography for MMPs and immunoblotting for TIMP-1. The profile of alteration at protein level correlated well with that at mRNA level. These data suggest that synthesis of MMPs and TIMP is a prolonged process and arterial SMC is a major source of MMP production in arterial neointima. Enhanced synthesis of MMPs and TIMPs at late stage of neointimal development may contribute to arterial ECM metabolism.<newchar><newabs>11139342<newchar>During tissue morphogenesis and tumor invasion, epithelial cells must undergo intercellular rearrangement in which cells are repositioned with respect to one another and the surrounding mesenchymal extracellular matrix. Using three-dimensional aggregates of squamous epithelial cells, we show that such intercellular rearrangements can be triggered by activation of beta1 integrins after their ligation with extracellular matrices. On nonadherent substrates, multicellular aggregates (MCAs) formed rapidly via E-cadherin junctional complexes and over time became compacted spheroids exhibiting a more epithelial phenotype. After MCAs were replated on culture substrates, the spheroids collapsed to yield tightly arranged cell monolayers. Cell-cell contact induced rapid elevation in E-cadherin levels, which was due to an increase in the metabolic stability of junctional receptors. During MCA remodeling of cell-cell adhesions, and monolayer formation, their E-cadherin levels fell rapidly. Similar behavior was obtained regardless of which ECM ligand-collagen type I, fibronectin, or laminin 1-MCAs were seeded on. In contrast, when seeded onto a matrix elaborated by squamous epithelial cells, cells in the MCA attached, spread, lost cell-cell junctions, and dispersed. Analysis identified laminin 5 as the active ECM ligand in this matrix, and MCA dispersion required functional beta1 integrin and specifically alpha3beta1. Furthermore, substrate-immobilized anti-integrin antibody effectively reproduced the epithelial-mesenchymal-like transition induced by the laminin 5 matrix. During the early stages of aggregate rearrangement and collapse, cells on laminin 5 substrates, but not those on collagen I substrates, exhibited intense cortical arrays of F-actin, microspikes, and fascin accumulation at their peripheral surfaces. These results suggest that engagement of specific integrin-ligand pairs regulates cadherin junctional adhesions during events common to epithelial morphogenesis and tumor invasion.<newchar><newabs>16167340<newchar>The migration of endothelial cells (ECs) plays an important role in vascular remodeling and regeneration. EC migration can be regulated by different mechanisms such as chemotaxis, haptotaxis, and mechanotaxis. This review will focus on fluid shear stress-induced mechanotransduction during EC migration. EC migration and mechanotransduction can be modulated by cytoskeleton, cell surface receptors such as integrins and proteoglycans, the chemical and physical properties of extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell-cell adhesions. The shear stress applied on the luminal surface of ECs can be sensed by cell membrane and associated receptor and transmitted throughout the cell to cell-ECM adhesions and cell-cell adhesions. As a result, shear stress induces directional migration of ECs by promoting lamellipodial protrusion and the formation of focal adhesions (FAs) at the front in the flow direction and the disassembly of FAs at the rear. Persistent EC migration in the flow direction can be driven by polarized activation of signaling molecules and the positive feedback loops constituted by Rho GTPases, cytoskeleton, and FAs at the leading edge. Furthermore, shear stress-induced EC migration can overcome the haptotaxis of ECs. Given the hemodynamic environment of the vascular system, mechanotransduction during EC migration has a significant impact on vascular development, angiogenesis, and vascular wound healing.<newchar><newabs>10605691<newchar>Tenascin (Tn) is an extracellular matrix (ECM) glycoprotein upregulated during development, repair and oncogenesis. In the normal adult liver, Tn is limited to vessels and, focally, to sinusoidal walls. In this study, samples were obtained from 12 livers removed during transplantation for primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Paraffin sections were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies BC-4 which recognizes all isoforms of Tn and alpha-SMA-1 to alpha smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA). Intense Tn reactions were noted in areas of ductular proliferation and inflammation at the parenchyma-stroma interface. In the absence of ductular proliferation, no selective Tn upregulation was noted. Staining was preferentially located adjacent to ductular basement membranes, with minimal extension into the surrounding ECM. Advanced histologic stages with micronodules rimmed by proliferating ductules showed the most florid Tn reactions, whereas fibrous septa and edematous perinodular haloes did not react. Increased periductal Tn was also seen associated with active inflammation, notably around large, dilated septal ducts, while fibro-obliterative ductal lesions and &quot;onion skin fibrosis&quot; did not stain. Focally enhanced Tn staining was noted in sinusoids neighboring ductular proliferation, and in dilated sinusoids within cirrhotic nodules. Reactions with alpha-SMA-1 highlighted myofibroblasts and activated Ito cells in topographic association with Tn reactions. We conclude that Tn is upregulated in PSC where it is preferentially localized in the remodeling matrix encompassing proliferating ductules and in altered periductal matrix. Our results suggest that Tn determinations in tissue or serum samples might be helpful in the clinical assessment of &quot;activity&quot; in PSC.<newchar><newabs>10366632<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes that degrade the components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The balance between MMPs and their inhibitors [tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs)] in the pericellular environment determines the most significant proteolytic events in tissue remodeling. In vitro evidence is accumulating that these molecules may be crucial in the maturation of neural cells. Here, we investigated the in vivo expression of MMPs 2, 3, and 9 and TIMPs 1, 2, and 3 in the developing and adult rat cerebellum using immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. During postnatal development, all Purkinje (PK) cell somata expressed all the MMPs and TIMPs studied, whereas their growing dendritic trees expressed only MMP 3 and TIMP 3. In the adult, MMP 3 was confined to PK cell bodies, whereas TIMP 3 was expressed in PK cell somata and processes. Irrespective of the developmental stage, Bergmann glial processes contained only MMP 9, but their somata contained both TIMP 1 and MMP 9. In granular cells, MMPs 3 and 9 and TIMPs 1, 2, and 3 were chiefly detected at a time when migration is known to be maximal; except for that of TIMP 1, their expression persisted in the internal granular layer in the adult. The functional relevance of MMP expression was verified by gelatin zymography. MMP 9 activity was maximal on postnatal day 10 (P10) and was detectable at a low level on P15 and in the adult, whereas MMP 2 activity remained similar throughout postnatal development. Regional and cell-specific expression of MMPs and TIMPs closely reflects the successive stages of cerebellar development, thereby suggesting a pivotal role for ECM proteolysis in brain development and plasticity.<newchar><newabs>10226073<newchar>Acidic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-1), a prototype member of the heparin-binding growth factor family, influences proliferation, differentiation, and protein synthesis in different cell types. However, its possible role on lung extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism has not been evaluated. In this study we examined the effects of FGF-1 and FGF-1 plus heparin on type I collagen, collagen-binding stress protein HSP47, interstitial collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase [MMP]-1), gelatinase A, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 and TIMP-2 expression by normal human lung fibroblasts. Heparin was used because it enhances the biologic activities of FGF-1. Fibroblasts were exposed either to 20 ng/ml FGF-1 plus 100 micrograms/ml heparin for 48 h or to FGF-1 or heparin alone. Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was analyzed by Northern blot. Collagen synthesis was evaluated by digestion of [3H]collagen with bacterial collagenase, MMP-1 by Western blot, and gelatinolytic activities by zymography. Our results show that FGF-1 induced collagenase mRNA expression, which was strongly enhanced when FGF-1 was used with heparin. Likewise, both FGF-1 and FGF-1 plus heparin reduced by 70 to 80% the expression of type I collagen transcript, in part through effect on pro-alpha1(I) collagen mRNA stability. A downregulation of HSP47 gene expression was also observed. Synthesis of collagen and collagenase proteins paralleled gene expression results. FGF-1 activities were abolished with genistein, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Neither FGF-1 nor FGF-1 plus heparin affected the expression of TIMP-1, TIMP-2, and gelatinase A. These findings demonstrate that FGF-1, mostly in the presence of heparin, upregulates collagenase and downregulates type I collagen expression that might have a protective role in avoiding collagen accumulation during lung ECM remodeling.<newchar><newabs>17987394<newchar>MMPs are endopeptidases that play a pivotal role in ECM turnover. RECK is a single membrane-anchored MMP-regulator. Here, we evaluated the temporal and spatial expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and RECK during alveolar bone regeneration. The maxillary central incisor of Wistar rats was extracted and the animals were killed at 1, 3, 7, 10, 14, 21, 28, and 42 days post-operatively (n = 3/period). The hemimaxillae were collected, demineralized and embedded in paraffin. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed by the immunoperoxidase technique with polyclonal antibodies. On day 1, polymorphonuclear cells in the blood clot presented mild immunolabeling for MMPs. During bone remodeling, osteoblasts facing new bone showed positive staining for gelatinases and RECK in all experimental periods. MMPs were also found in the connective tissue and endothelial cells. Our results show for the first time that inactive and/or active forms of MMP-2, MMP-9 and RECK are differentially expressed by osteogenic and connective cells during several events of alveolar bone regeneration. This may be important for the replacement of the blood clot by connective tissue, and in the formation, maturation and remodeling of new bone.<newchar><newabs>19288452<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc and calcium-dependent endopeptidases involved in remodeling and physiological homeostasis of extracellular matrix (ECM). The metalloproteinases activity is predominantly modulated by specific tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). The balance between MMPs and TIMPs is likely to play an important role in remodeling uterine arteries in pregnancy, and it may represent means by which vasodilatation is maintained in later pregnancy. Moreover, increased levels of MMPs and in particular MMP-2 play a role in the vascular alterations induced by hypertension. The aim of this study was the evaluation of MMP-2 and -9, along with their inhibitors TIMP-1 and -2, in pre-eclamptic women compared with normotensive pregnancy and non-pregnant women. Fourteen pre-eclamptic women were compared with 37 normotensive women in different gestational age and 21 non-pregnant women. Multiplexed sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to measure MMPs and TIMPs simultaneously. MMP-2 levels were significantly higher in pre-eclamptic women vs. both non-pregnant and physiologic pregnant women. MMP-9 concentrations were significantly higher in physiologic pregnant vs. non-pregnant women. The serum levels of TIMP-1 were significantly higher in pre-eclamptic vs. both non-pregnant and physiologic pregnant women. TIMP-2 values were higher in physiologic pregnant women and pre-eclamptic women vs. non-pregnant women. A positive correlation between MMP-9 values and gestational age was observed in normal pregnant women. Results of the present investigation confirm that MMP-2 and TIMP-1 values are significantly higher in preeclampsia. We confirm that the modification of the fine balance between MMPs and their inhibitors plays a greater role in the structural and functional vascular changes of women with complicated pregnancies.<newchar><newabs>19728713<newchar>The consumption of flavonoid-rich Citrus extracts has been associated with multiple beneficial effects including anti-inflammatory properties, but the potential effects on the inflammatory responses in the gut have not been thoroughly investigated. We used microarrays to search for molecular changes induced in human colon fibroblasts in response to the exposure to a flavanone-rich bitter orange extract under physiologically representative conditions. Dietary nontoxic levels of the predigested extract induced moderate but significant changes in the expression of genes associated with tissue repair and inflammation. Among the top regulated genes, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) was downregulated, and the matrix metallopeptidase 12 (MMP-12) was upregulated (mRNA and protein levels). Both proteins are involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and fibroblast migration. The extract also affected the fibroblast migration and reduced monocyte adhesion, but the response was different in unstimulated cells and in cells pretreated with TNF-alpha. Collectively, these results were indicative of a moderate activation of the colon fibroblast inflammation-related function after exposure to the extract. Further investigations are required to identify the in vivo role of this Citrus derived extract in the maintenance of the normal balance in the intestine and in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases.<newchar><newabs>11305905<newchar>Nitric oxide (NO) and related molecules play important roles in vascular biology. NO modifies proteins through nitrosylation of free cysteine residues, and such modifications are important in mediating NO's biologic activity. Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) is a sulfhydryl rich protein that is expressed by endothelial cells and secreted into the extracellular matrix (ECM) where it is bound to fibronectin. Tissue TG exhibits a Ca(2+)-dependent transglutaminase activity (TGase) that cross-links proteins involved in wound healing, tissue remodeling, and ECM stabilization. Since tTG is in proximity to sites of NO production, has 18 free cysteine residues, and utilizes a cysteine for catalysis, we investigated the factors that regulated NO binding and tTG activity. We report that TGase activity is regulated by NO through a unique Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism. Tissue TG can be poly-S-nitrosylated by the NO carrier, S-nitrosocysteine (CysNO). In the absence of Ca(2+), up to eight cysteines were nitrosylated without modifying TGase activity. In the presence of Ca(2+), up to 15 cysteines were found to be nitrosylated and this modification resulted in an inhibition of TGase activity. The addition of Ca(2+) to nitrosylated tTG was able to trigger the release of NO groups (i.e. denitrosylation). tTG nitrosylated in the absence of Ca(2+) was 6-fold more susceptible to inhibition by Mg-GTP. When endothelial cells in culture were incubated with tTG and stimulated to produce NO, the exogenous tTG was S-nitrosylated. Furthermore, S-nitrosylated tTG inhibited platelet aggregation induced by ADP. In conclusion, we provide evidence that Ca(2+) regulates the S-nitrosylation and denitrosylation of tTG and thereby TGase activity. These data suggest a novel allosteric role for Ca(2+) in regulating the inhibition of tTG by NO and a novel function for tTG in dispensing NO bioactivity.<newchar><newabs>16368506<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of structurally and functionally related zinc-containing endopeptidases that are capable of degrading almost all of the components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Under physiological and pathological conditions, the MMPs play a significant role in the efficient tissue turnover and remodeling. Specific MMPs are responsible for the matrix degradation and remodeling. Maintenance of the equilibrium between deposition and degradation of the extracellular matrix is essential to the normal tissue development. Therefore, synthesis and breakdown of the MMPs are tightly controlled by protein kinases which mediate a host of other cellular processes. The MMPs are often induced by several agents and any uncontrolled expression of the MMPs can contribute to the pathogenesis of many human diseases. This review focuses on the regulation of the MMPs by the protein kinases at the level of gene expression and their signaling pathways.<newchar><newabs>16765374<newchar>The ovarian hormone, 17beta-estradiol, has been suggested to play an important role in gender-specific differences in cardiovascular diseases. One possible cardioprotective mechanism involves the interaction between 17beta-estradiol and the renin-angiotensin system. Previous studies demonstrated that fibroblast function and gene expression are regulated by biochemical factors including growth factors, hormones, and cytokines, but little is known regarding the integration of these diverse signals. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the ability of 17beta-estradiol to modulate angiotensin II (AngII) effects on integrin-induced collagen gel contraction, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and expression, and signal transduction pathways in isolated neonatal cardiac fibroblasts. 17beta-estradiol significantly attenuated AngII-stimulated collagen gel contraction and significantly diminished the effect of AngII on the expression of beta1 and not alpha1integrins. Active MMP-2 levels were decreased by AngII and addition of 17beta-estradiol resulted in further reductions. Relative MMP-2 mRNA levels showed essentially identical patterns to protein levels. 17beta-estradiol pretreatment increased AngII-mediated mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase p42/44 activation and slightly decreased p38 activation compared to non-pretreated fibroblasts. Simultaneous addition of 17beta-estradiol and AngII had little to no effect on AngII activation of p42/44 or p38 MAP kinase. The current studies demonstrate the inhibitory role of estrogen on AngII-induced fibroblast-mediated ECM remodeling, gene expression, and signal transduction. These studies begin to elucidate the mechanisms of estrogen effects on myocardial remodeling and function.<newchar><newabs>18287663<newchar>Experiments aimed at analyzing the response of blood vessels to mechanical injury and ensuing remodeling responses often employ the highly characterized carotid artery balloon injury model in laboratory rats. This approach utilizes luminal insertion of a balloon embolectomy catheter into the common carotid artery with inflation and withdrawal resulting in an injury characterized by vascular endothelial cell (EC) denudation and medial wall distension. The adaptive response to this injury is typified by robust vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) replication and migration, SMC apoptosis and necrosis, enhanced synthesis and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, partial vascular EC regeneration from the border zones, luminal narrowing, and establishment of a neointima in time-dependent fashion. Evaluation of these adaptive responses to blood vessel injury can include acute and longer term qualitative and quantitative measures including expression analyses, activity assays, immunostaining for a plethora of factors and signals, and morphometry of neointima formation and gross mural remodeling. This chapter presents a logical continuation of Chapter 1 that offers details for performing the rat carotid artery balloon injury model in a standard laboratory setting by providing commonly used protocols for performing histological and morphometric analyses in such studies. Moreover, procedures, caveats, and considerations included in this chapter are highly relevant for alternative animal vascular physiology/pathophysiology studies and in particular those related to mechanisms of vascular injury and repair. Included in this chapter are specifics for in situ perfusion-fixation, tissue harvesting and processing for both snap-frozen and paraffin-embedded protocols, specimen embedding and sectioning, slide preparation, several standard histological staining steps, and routine morphological assessment.<newchar><newabs>15193834<newchar>Rupture of the ventricular free wall is a leading cause of death in patients with acute myocardial infarction (MI). There are a number of risk indicators that are associated with cardiac rupture, such as female gender, old age, hypertension, and first MI. Typical symptoms of cardiac rupture are recurrent or persistent chest pain, syncope, and distension of jugular veins. Electrocardiographic signs may include sinus tachycardia, new Q-waves in 2 or more leads, persistent or recurrent ST segment elevation, deviation of expected evolutionary T-wave pattern, and electromechanical dissociation in end-stage cases. Once patients at risk have been identified using clinical symptoms and electrocardiographic signs, a fast and sensitive diagnostic test to confirm cardiac rupture is transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). New insights in the etiology of subacute myocardial rupture suggests that defective cardiac remodeling may predispose the heart for rupture. The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) system has been shown to play an important role in cardiac extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and cardiac rupture. Current therapy of cardiac rupture consists mainly of surgery, and conservative management with hemodynamic monitoring, prolonged bed rest, beta-blockers, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in selected cases.<newchar><newabs>15036259<newchar>Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are natural inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) found in most tissues and body fluids. By inhibiting MMPs activities, they participate in tissue remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The balance between MMPs and TIMPs activities is involved in both normal and pathological events such as wound healing, tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, invasion, tumorigenesis and metastasis. The intracellular signalling controlling both TIMPs and MMPs expression begins to be elucidated and gaining insights into the molecular mechanisms regulated by TIMPs and MMPs could represent a new approach in the development of potential therapeutics. Numerous investigations have pointed out that TIMPs exhibit multifunctional activities distinct from MMP inhibition. In this review, we detailed the multiple activities of TIMPs in vivo and in vitro and we reported their implication in physiological and pathological processes. Further, we documented recent studies of their role in hematopoiesis and we itemized the different signalling pathways they induced.<newchar><newabs>12853116<newchar>In this study, we report the host genetic responses that characterize Trypanosoma cruzi-induced myocarditis in a murine model of infection and disease development. The mRNA species from the myocardium of infected mice were assessed using cDNA microarray technology at immediate early, acute, and chronic stages of infection. The immediate early reaction of the host to T. cruzi infection was marked by up-regulation of transcripts indicative of proinflammatory and interferon-induced immune responses. Following acute infection, overexpression of transcripts for extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, possibly initiated in response to myocardial injuries by invading and replicating parasites, was suggestive of active reparative and remodeling reactions. Surprisingly, progression to the cardiac disease phase was associated with coordinated down-regulation of a majority (&gt;70%) of the differentially expressed genes. Among the most repressed genes were the troponins, essential for contractile function of the myofibrils, and the genes encoding components of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathways. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blotting, and biochemical assays confirmed the microarray results and provided evidence for the deficiency of OXPHOS complex IV in the chagasic murine heart. We discuss the apparent role of OXPHOS dysfunction in the cardiac hypertrophic and remodeling processes with the development of chagasic cardiomyopathy (CCM).<newchar><newabs>11102748<newchar>Tenascin-C (TN-C) is a modular and multifunctional extracellular matrix (ECM) glycoprotein that is exquisitely regulated during embryonic development and in adult tissue remodeling. TN-C gene transcription is controlled by intracellular signals that are generated by multiple soluble factors, integrins and mechanical forces. These external cues are interpreted by particular DNA control elements that interact with different classes of transcription factors to activate or repress TN-C expression in a cell type- and differentiation-dependent fashion. Among the transcriptional regulators of the TN-C gene that have been identified, the homeobox family of proteins has emerged as a major player. Downstream from TN-C, intracellular signals that are relayed via specific cell surface receptors often impart contrary cellular functions, even within the same cell type. A key to understanding this behavior may lie in the dual ability of TN-C-enriched extracellular matrices to generate intracellular signals, and to define unique cellular morphologies that modulate these signal transduction pathways. Thus, despite the contention that TN-C null mice appear to develop and act normally, TN-C biology continues to provide a wealth of information regarding the complex nature of the ECM in development and disease.<newchar><newabs>12712832<newchar>The major role of fibroblasts is maintaining integrity, solidity and form of lung tissue. This is achieved by producing a vest variety of extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as collagen, laminin, fibronectin, hyaluronic acid and proteoglycans. Remodeling in the airways as seen in asthma is largely a result of altered fibroblast behavior. Fibroblasts produces a variety of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and surface molecules which are able to activate and attract that stimulate inflammatory reactions. This paper presents a review of the fibroblast behavior and their interaction in the ongoing inflammatory and remodeling processes of the airway in asthma. Further we discuss the influence of glucocorticoids and long-acting beta 2-agonists on fibroblast in relation to their beneficial clinical effects in asthma therapy.<newchar><newabs>12781969<newchar>The presence of extracellular matrix (ECM) degrading enzymes was investigated in naupliar stages of the barnacle Balanus amphitrite Darwin. The results of substrate gel-zymography and quantitative assays demonstrated that naupliar extracts contain several protease activities that are specific towards gelatin substrates; some caseinolytic activity was also detected. Substrate specificity was observed in all naupliar stages (II-VI). The gelatinolytic activities showed dependence on both Ca(2+) and Zn(2+) and inhibition by EDTA, EGTA, and 1,10-phenanthroline. Also Mg(2+) partially activated the enzymes, whereas Cd(2+), Cu(2+), Hg(2+) and Pb(2+) were inhibitory. The thermal denaturation profile was significantly different in the presence and absence of Ca(2+) and Zn(2+). Overall, the results indicate that the Ca(2+)/Zn(2+)-dependent gelatinase activities in barnacle nauplii belong to the subfamily of matrix metalloproteases. Barnacle larvae MMPs showed biochemical characteristics different from those of vertebrate MMPs but common to other gelatinases from marine invertebrates: they were unaffected by several protease inhibitors and insensitive to specific activators/inhibitors of vertebrate MMPs. The presence of MMP-like activities in different naupliar stages suggests a constitutive role for these enzymes in ECM remodeling during barnacle larvae growth and development.<newchar><newabs>10460484<newchar>Latent transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) binding protein (LTBP), a component of the high-molecular-weight latent TGFbeta complex, is found in various cell and tissue types. Originally described as a TGFbeta-masking protein, recent detections of four isoforms and numerous splice variants provide new aspects of its putative functional role. Regulation and sequestration of TGFbeta activity and structural remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) seem to be the main tasks, but other possible functions might exist. The mechanism by which LTBP interacts with cell surface molecules or cellular receptors and ECM components remains unclear. Cellular, molecular and functional aspects will be discussed.<newchar><newabs>11642740<newchar>Detailed histomorphometric analysis of human conjunctival biopsy specimens has convincingly demonstrated that tissue remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is an essential and dynamic process associated with conjunctival scarring in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid (OCP). The conjunctival scarring often eventually results in impaired vision and/or blindness. The molecular mechanisms of conjunctival scarring are not completely understood. Accumulating evidence indicates that the early phase of conjunctival fibrosis is linked with an immuno-inflammatory process mediated by cytokines released by activated conjunctival cells and/or by infiltrating cells. Fibrogenic cytokines secreted by inflammatory cells and fibroblasts might actively be involved in remodeling of the matrix within the conjunctival stroma, possibly by regulating the altered metabolism of matrix proteins.<newchar><newabs>12531895<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc endopeptidases that degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) components during normal and pathogenic tissue remodeling. Inappropriate expression of these enzymes contributes to the development of vascular pathology, including atherosclerosis. MMP-9 is expressed in its active form in atherosclerotic lesions and is believed to play an important role in vascular remodeling, smooth muscle cell migration, and plaque instability. We demonstrate here that the liver X receptors (LXRs) LXRalpha and LXRbeta inhibit basal and cytokine-inducible expression of MMP-9. Treatment of murine peritoneal macrophages with the synthetic LXR agonists GW3965 or T1317 reduces MMP-9 mRNA expression and blunts its induction by pro-inflammatory stimuli including lipopolysaccharide, interleukin-1beta, and tumor necrosis factor alpha. In contrast, macrophage expression of MMP-12 and MMP-13 is not altered by LXR ligands. We further show that the ability of LXR ligands to regulate MMP-9 expression is strictly receptor-dependent and is not observed in macrophages obtained from LXRalphabeta null mice. Analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the MMP-9 gene indicates that LXR/RXR heterodimers do not bind directly to the MMP-9 promoter. Rather, activation of LXRs represses MMP-9 expression, at least in part through antagonism of the NFkappaB signaling pathway. These observations identify the regulation of macrophage MMP-9 expression as a mechanism whereby activation of LXRs may impact macrophage inflammatory responses.<newchar><newabs>18321201<newchar>Accumulating evidence supports the importance of redox signaling in the pathogenesis and progression of hypertension. Redox signaling is implicated in many different physiological and pathological processes in the vasculature. High blood pressure is in part determined by elevated total peripheral vascular resistance, which is ascribed to dysregulation of vasomotor function and structural remodeling of blood vessels. Aberrant redox signaling, usually induced by excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and/or by decreases in antioxidant activity, can induce alteration of vascular function. ROS increase vascular tone by influencing the regulatory role of endothelium and by direct effects on the contractility of vascular smooth muscle. ROS contribute to vascular remodeling by influencing phenotype modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells, aberrant growth and death of vascular cells, cell migration, and extracellular matrix (ECM) reorganization. Thus, there are diverse roles of the vascular redox system in hypertension, suggesting that the complexity of redox signaling in distinct spatial spectrums should be considered for a better understanding of hypertension.<newchar><newabs>17632767<newchar>Remodeling of vascular microenvironments during normal and tumor-induced angiogenesis is an important, yet poorly understood mechanism by which endothelial cells (ECs) contribute to the activation or resolution of angiogenesis. We used microarray analyses to monitor changes in the transcriptome of ECs undergoing angiogenesis when cultured onto Matrigel matrices. This strategy identified 308 genes whose expression in ECs was altered at least 3-fold by angiogenesis, of which 63 genes were found to encode for secretory proteins. In vitro assays that modeled key steps in the angiogenic process showed that several identified genes possessed pro- or anti-angiogenic activities (e.g., SMOC-2, secreted modular calcium-binding protein-2; CRELD-2, cysteine-rich with EGF-like domains-1; MAGP-2, microfibril-associated glycoprotein-2; lumican; and ECM-1, extracellular matrix protein-1). In particular, MAGP-2 expression potentiated EC proliferation and p38 MAPK activation stimulated by the pro-angiogenic factors, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF); it also stimulated EC invasion and angiogenic sprouting, and more importantly, promoted the development and infiltration of vessels into Matrigel plugs implanted into genetically normal mice. Conversely, lumican inhibited EC activation of p38 MAPK, as well as their invasion, angiogenic sprouting, and vessel formation in mice. Collectively, our findings provide new insights into how EC stromal remodeling regulates angiogenesis activation and resolution, as well as identify two novel EC-secreted stromal proteins that modulate angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo.<newchar><newabs>12608894<newchar>Connective tissue remodeling of the interstitium is an important feature of chronic lung diseases encompassing interstitial inflammatory changes and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis. The early inflammatory phase is usually associated with the release of several cytokines and chemokines by activated resident cells and infiltrating cells which, in turn, help further recruit inflammatory mononuclear cells. Cytokines and growth factors secreted by inflammatory cells and by interstitial cells (fibroblasts and myofibroblasts) play an important role in the fibrogenic phase of pulmonary fibrosis by inducing matrix synthesis. In addition, matrix-degrading enzymes and their inhibitors also contribute to extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in pulmonary fibrosis. This review addresses the pathophysiology of wound healing and different phases of pulmonary fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>11523694<newchar>In this comprehensive review of matrix remodeling, one central theme that bears re-emphasis is the extensivecross-talk and dynamic interactions that exist between terminally differentiated, postmitotic cells, proliferative cells, and the ECM of the cardiovascular system. The activities of MMPs and TIMPs constitute a well-orchestrated contest to maintain tissue integrity and homeostasis. Overexpression of MMPs tilts the balance in favor of irreversible tissue destruction of joints (eg, as in rheumatic disease), and efforts to curtail such errant pathways are ongoing (123). Thrombolytic therapy and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty represent effective strategies for restoring antegrade flow in occluded vessels, but multiple factors preclude most patients with AMI from receiving either of these treatments. Tissue healing and remodeling is a process in which the biology of MMPs becomes universally applicable. Basic lessons from the biochemistry and enzymology of MMPs, combined with the mechanisms of gene expression, will undoubtedly impact the development of future therapies involving MMPs and their endogenous inhibitors. In addition, formidable challenges, ranging from bioavailability to tissue penetration and toxicity in animal models, face investigators using existing pharmacotherapeutics. For congenital diseases, such as Marfan syndrome, which primarily affects the connective tissue, future therapies may be targeted to the underlying pathobiology involving MMPs. Strategies aimed at correction of the genetic defect may be complemented by those to prevent or ameliorate fundamental imbalances in matrix turnover and deposition. The future challenge for cardiovascular medicine is to appropriately shift the pendulum, not to the exclusion of, but to the recognition of the dynamic interaction that exists between myocyte and nonmyocyte populations, which clearly affect the pathogenesis of many acquired and genetic disorders.<newchar><newabs>17167774<newchar>The metalloproteinases degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) components and activate growth factors, thereby contributing to physiological events (tissue remodeling in pregnancy, wound healing, angiogenesis) and pathological conditions (cancer, arthritis, periodontitis). The intent of this review is to bring together various studies on transcriptional and post-transcriptional control of metalloproteinase expression. Certainly, much information is known as to the cis-elements and corresponding trans-activators regulating expression of these genes. We discuss the fact that a number of the metalloproteinase promoters share common structural features and, therefore, not surprisingly are co-regulated in their expression to some extent. More recently, much effort has been devoted to understanding the role of chromatin in regulating gene expression. While this area has been understudied with respect to matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) regulation, the literature indicates a convincing role for both histone modifications and chromatin-remodeling motors in controlling expression of multiple metalloproteinases. In addition to transcriptional control, mRNA stability and protein translation also contribute to the metalloproteinase product amount. We discuss such studies and how various biological cues, including TGF-beta, regulate the levels of certain collagenases either solely through mRNA stabilization or by jointly targeting transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. We also discuss the current deficits in our knowledge, concerning tissue-specific expression and why despite elevated amounts/activity of trans-activators targeting MMP promoters in tumor cells, nevertheless, MMP expression is largely restricted to the stromal compartment. Finally, we argue for potential technologies to regulate MMP expression of utility in pathological conditions where these enzymes are aberrantly expressed.<newchar><newabs>18658276<newchar>Matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) is increased in lung injury following hyperoxia exposure in neonatal mice, in association with impaired alveolar development. We studied the role of MMP-9 in the mechanism of hyperoxia-induced functional and histological changes in neonatal mouse lung. Reduced alveolarization with remodeling of ECM is a major morbidity component of oxidant injury in developing lung. MMP-9 mediates oxidant injury in developing lung causing altered lung remodeling. Five-day-old neonatal wild-type (WT) and MMP-9 (-/-) mice were exposed to hyperoxia for 8 days. The lungs were inflation fixed, and sections were examined for morphometry. The mean linear intercept and alveolar counts were evaluated. Immunohistochemistry for MMP-9 and elastin was performed. MMP-2, MMP-9, type I collagen, and tropoelastin were measured by Western blot analysis. Lung quasistatic compliance was studied in anaesthetized mice. MMP-2 and MMP-9 were significantly increased in lungs of WT mice exposed to hyperoxia compared with controls. Immunohistochemistry showed an increase in MMP-9 in mesenchyme and alveolar epithelium of hyperoxic lungs. The lungs of hyperoxia-exposed WT mice had less gas exchange surface area and were less compliant compared with room air-exposed WT and hyperoxia-exposed MMP-9 (-/-) mice. Type I collagen and tropoelastin were increased in hyperoxia-exposed WT with aberrant elastin staining. These changes were ameliorated in hyperoxia-exposed MMP-9 (-/-) mice. MMP-9 plays an important role in the structural changes consequent to oxygen-induced lung injury. Blocking MMP-9 activity may lead to novel therapeutic approaches in preventing bronchopulmonary dysplasia.<newchar><newabs>17331484<newchar>Myocardial ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury is associated with structural alterations involving both the necrotic and the non-necrotic myocardium. These changes are referred to as myocardial remodeling. In addition to the loss of critical cardiomyocyte mass through cell death, there are further structural alterations associated with scarring, as well as changes in a family of endogenous enzymes, the matrix metalloproteases (MMP), which cause loss of myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) [Janssens S, Lijnen HR. What has been learned about cardiovascular effects of matrix metalloproteinases from mouse models. Cardiovasc Res 2006;69:585-594., Wainwright CL. Matrix metalloproteinases, oxidative stress and the acute response to acute myocardial ischaemia and reperfusion. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2004;4:132-138.]. The chemokine TGFbeta1, which has wide-ranging effects upon cells and tissues, is showing promise as a useful drug/agent for the limitation of IR injury. Coupled with the identification of TGFbeta1 as a therapeutic agent for IR treatment are investigations into its mode of delivery to the patient. Gene therapy utilizing delivery by viral vectors is just one of many possible ways to deliver TGFbeta1 for IR treatment. In this review we discuss the mechanisms of action of TGFbeta1 and how it might be delivered successfully to patients under risk of or who are actively undergoing acute IR injury.<newchar><newabs>11099475<newchar>MT3-MMP, a membrane-anchored matrix metalloproteinase, has been proposed to participate in the remodeling of extracellular matrix either by direct proteolysis or via activating other enzymes such as progelatinase A. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the effect of exogenously transfected MT3-MMP in a tissue remodeling system: growth and tubulogenesis of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells in collagen gels. Although the parental cells require MMP activities for both growth and tubulogenesis, over-expression of wild-type MT3-MMP, but not its catalytically inactive mutant, leads to further enhancement of both processes, independent of its downstream substrate, progelatinase A. Mechanistically, MT3-MMP accomplishes such an effect by displaying on cell surfaces as active species, ready to activate progelatinase A or degrade ECM molecules. These data strongly suggest that MT3-MMP possesses the potential to directly enhance the growth and invasiveness of cells in vivo, two critical processes for development and carcinogenesis.<newchar><newabs>16881043<newchar>[Image: see text] In this work we investigate the feasibility of modifying porcine-derived BAM to include HA with a view to developing a model, artificial extracellular matrix for the study of bladder cell-matrix interactions. HA-DPTH was incorporated into BAM disks and then cross-linked oxidatively to a disulfide containing hydrogel. Disks were seeded with bladder smooth muscle cells (BSMC) and UEC under three culture configurations and incubated for 3, 7, and 14 d. At each time point, matrix contraction was measured, and media supernatants assayed for cell-secreted gelatinase activity. To evaluate cell adherence and organization, triple immunofluorescent labeling of cell nuclei, actin cytoskeleton, and focal contacts was performed. HA-modified BAM exhibited a significant increase in matrix contraction and induced a higher level of cell-secreted gelatinase activity compared to unmodified BAM. Immunofluorescent labeling demonstrated that BSMCs remained adherent to both scaffold types over time. The distribution and organization of the cytoskeleton and focal contacts did not appear to be altered by the presence of HA. Interestingly, cellular infiltration into modified BAM was evident by 7 d and continued beyond 14 d, while BSMCs seeded onto unmodified BAM remained localized to the surface out to 14 d, with minimal infiltration evident only at day 28. These differences in cell infiltration support the gelatinase activity results. Increases in cell migration and matrix proteolysis in the presence of HA may be contributing factors toward BAM remodeling leading to increased matrix contraction with time. The model ECM developed in this work will be utilized for future studies aimed at elucidating the mechanisms controlling key remodeling events associated with bladder repair. Matrix contraction of cell-seeded BAM scaffolds.<newchar><newabs>15964615<newchar>The reorganization of the human endometrium is termed decidualization, which includes endometrial cell proliferation, differentiation, integrin switching and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during early pregnancy. The present study aimed to investigate distribution patterns, staining intensity and sex steroid-mediated regulation of integrin alpha5 (CD49e), integrin beta4 (CD49f) expression and their ligands fibronectin and laminin during decidualization. Human tissue samples were evaluated in two groups, those collected in early days and those collected in advanced days of the first trimester. Correlating immunostaining was found between laminin and integrin beta4, and between fibronectin and integrin alpha5. The expression of fibronectin was higher than that of laminin in the early days (p &lt; 0.05). Temporal and spatial immunostaining of integrin beta4 and alpha5 in the apical pole of luminal and glandular cells was observed as pregnancy progressed (p &lt; 0.05). In vitro results showed that human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulated laminin expression, downregulated integrin beta4 expression, whereas estradiol decreased fibronectin expression by Ishikawa cells. hCG suppressed fibronectin expression in endometrial stromal cells in culture. Our results suggest that fibronectin is responsible for induction of decidual cell differentiation, and different temporal and spatial expression of the integrins may play a role in implantation. Our in vitro results suggest that regulation of extracellular matrix remodeling and integrin switching are at least partially regulated by reproductive hormones.<newchar><newabs>19394140<newchar>Lumican is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan (SLRP) of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with anti-tumor activity. We recently demonstrated that lumican inhibits the migration of melanoma cells and identified beta1 integrin as mediator of this effect [M.F. D'Onofrio, S. Brézillon, T. Baranek, C. Perreau, P.J. Roughley, F.X. Maquart, Y. Wegrowski, Identification of beta1 integrin as mediator of melanoma cell adhesion to lumican, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 365 (2008) 266-272]. The aim of the present work was to study beta1 integrin, focal adhesion complexes, actin distribution and expression in the presence of lumican substratum in comparison to type I collagen or fibronectin substrata in A375 human melanoma cells. The protein distribution was investigated by immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy. In parallel, their expression was evaluated by Western immunoblotting and Real-time Reverse Transcription-PCR analyses. The interaction of melanoma cells with the lumican substratum resulted in heterogeneous distribution of beta1 integrin on cell membrane after 24h of seeding. Concomitantly, a reorganization of actin stress fibers and a significant decrease in vinculin immunostaining at focal adhesion complexes were observed. No alteration of the expression was detected at protein and mRNA levels. However, a cytosolic accumulation of vinculin focal adhesion protein was observed on lumican substratum by confocal microscopy. Moreover, vinculin expression was significantly increased in cytosolic fractions in comparison to cells seeded on type I collagen or fibronectin substrata. Our results suggest that lumican induces an alteration of the link between actin filaments and beta1 integrin, characterized by a cytosolic accumulation of vinculin focal adhesion protein, which could lead to a destabilization of focal adhesion complexes. In addition, focal adhesion kinase phosphorylated at tyrosine-397 (pFAK) was significantly decreased. Therefore, the cytoskeleton remodeling and the decreased pFAK phosphorylation induced by lumican in melanoma cells might explain, at least in part, the anti-invasive effect of this SLRP.<newchar><newabs>19516962<newchar>Periostin (Postn) is a heterofunctional secreted extracellular matrix (ECM) protein comprised of four fasciclin domains that promotes cellular adhesion and movement, as well as collagen fibrillogenesis. Postn is expressed in unique growth centers during embryonic development where it facilitates epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of select cell populations undergoing reorganization. In the heart, Postn is expressed in the developing valves, cardiac fibroblasts and in regions of the outflow track. In the adult, Postn expression is specifically induced in areas of tissue injury or areas with ongoing cellular re-organization. In the adult heart Postn is induced in the ventricles following myocardial infarction, pressure overload stimulation, or generalized cardiomyopathy. Here we will review the functional consequences associated with Postn induction in both the developing and adult heart. The majority of data collected to date suggest a common function for Postn in both development and disease as a potent inducible regulator of cellular reorganization and extracellular matrix homeostasis, although some alternate and controversial functions have also been ascribed to Postn, the validity of which will be discussed here.<newchar>Periostin<n-term>cardiac<n-term>development<n-term>hypertrophy<n-term>remodeling.<n-term>signaling<n-term><newabs>15104525<newchar>Formation of skeletal elements during embryogenesis and the dynamic remodeling of bone in the adult involve an exquisite interplay of developmental cues, signaling proteins, transcription factors, and their coregulatory proteins that support differentiation of osteogenic lineage cells from the initial mesenchymal progenitor cell to the mature osteocyte in mineralized connective tissue. As regulatory factors continue to be identified, the complexity of the molecular mechanisms that control gene expression in osteoblast lineage cells and drive the osteoblast maturation process are being further appreciated. A central regulator of bone formation is the Runx2 (Cbfa1/AML3) transcription factor which fulfills its role as a master regulatory switch through unique properties for mediating the temporal activation and/or repression of cell growth and phenotypic genes as osteoblasts progress through stages of differentiation. This review examines the multifunctional roles of Runx2 during osteogenesis. Runx2 functions as a &quot;platform protein&quot; that interacts with a spectrum of coregulatory proteins to provide a combinatorial mechanism for integrating cell signaling pathways required for osteoblast differentiation and the tissue-specific regulation of gene expression. In a broader context, it has recently been appreciated that the Runx1 hematopoietic factor and the Runx3 gene associated with neural and gut development are also expressed in the skeleton, although at present our knowledge of their roles in bone formation is limited. Here we discuss the biological functions of Runx factors in promoting cell fate determination and lineage progression, which include (1) regulating gene activation and repression through coregulatory protein interactions and by supporting chromatin remodeling; (2) integrating ECM signaling and cues from developmental, hormonal, and signal transduction pathways by formation of complexes organized in subnuclear domains; and (3) mediating cell growth control. Last, a comprehensive understanding of Runx functions in the skeleton must consider the regulatory mechanisms that control Runx2 transcription and its functional activity through posttranslational modifications.<newchar><newabs>16173924<newchar>1. Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) reduce mortality after myocardial infarction (MI). Although this may be predominantly due to their known anti-ischaemic actions, these drugs are known to have other beneficial effects. 2. Because pathological deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) material is a key component of remodelling after MI, we sought to determine whether atorvastatin could inhibit ECM production in vitro. 3. The addition of atorvastatin to rat cardiac fibroblasts stimulated with either transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 (TGF-beta1) or angiotensin (Ang) II reduced collagen synthesis in a dose-dependent manner (3.7-fold reduction (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.8-15; P &lt; 0.01) and 5.3-fold reduction (95% CI 1.8-7.7; P &lt; 0.01), respectively, compared with stimulant alone). Similar observations were made in human cardiac fibroblast cell culture. Atorvastatin also dose-dependently reduced TGF-beta1 and AngII-induced increases in alpha(I)-procollagen mRNA (P &lt; 0.01 for both), as well as gene expression of the profibrotic peptide connective tissue growth factor. 4. Atorvastatin appears to directly inhibit collagen production by cardiac fibroblasts. This antifibrotic action may contribute to the antiremodelling effect of statins.<newchar><newabs>11048298<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are major proteolytic enzymes that are involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) turn over. MMP-2 (gelatinase A) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B) cleave type IV collagen, which is an important constituent of basement membrane. These enzymes play an important role in normal tissue homeostasis, but imbalance between MMPs and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) is thought to be a critical factor in regulating tissue remodeling. MMP-2 is produced by fibroblasts, endothelial, and epithelial cells, while MMP-9 is mainly produced by inflammatory cells. The role of MMPs was investigated through biochemical analysis or in situ expression, in the pathogenesis of two chronic inflammatory airway diseases, asthma and nasal polyposis. Both are characterized with the accumulation of active inflammatory cells, matrix remodeling and epithelial changes. Increased levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 were found in asthmatic subjects and NP. In NP, MMP-9 expression was detected in epithelial, endothelial and inflammatory cells. In this setting, MMP-9 could play a crucial role in the transmigration of basement membrane components by inflammatory cells leading to inflammatory cell accumulation and maintenance of inflammation in airway. Moreover, MMP-9 may contribute to cell migration, an important mechanism involved in the repair of the respiratory epithelium.<newchar><newabs>19522738<newchar>The pathogenesis of gastric ulcer is associated with remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) by various matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). However, how MMPs are regulated during nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced acute gastric ulceration is not well studied. In this study, different NSAIDs (80 mg/kg b.w.) were applied to generate acute gastric ulcer in the BALB/c mouse and the regulation of MMPs were investigated. NSAIDs caused dose-dependent induction in MMP-9 and -3 activities and expressions in ulcerated gastric tissues along with significant infiltration of inflammatory cells and disruption of gastric mucosal layer. In addition, an increase in tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interleukin (IL)-1beta and IL-8 expression, excessive generation of hydroxyl radical ((*)OH), and protein oxidation and lipid peroxidation were observed in acute ulcerated gastric tissues. In this study, the efficacy of melatonin on activities of MMP-9 and -3 during prevention of gastric ulcers was tested. Melatonin at a dose of 60 mg/kg b.w. downregulated MMP-9 and -3 both at the enzyme and protein levels in mouse gastric tissues during prevention as well as healing of acute gastric ulcers. It also blocked oxidative stress via inhibition of protein oxidation, lipid peroxidation, (*)OH generation and SOD-2 expression. Moreover, it suppressed myeloperoxidase activity and expressions of TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and IL-8. This study documents for the first time that induction of MMP-9 and -3 activities accompany NSAID-induced inflammation and oxidative stress in gastric tissues and indicates that, melatonin may be a preventive or therapeutic remedy for gastric ulcers.<newchar><newabs>15691878<newchar>To explore the mechanisms whereby estrogen and antiestrogen (tamoxifen (TAM)) can regulate breast cancer cell growth, we investigated gene expression changes in MCF7 cells treated with 17beta-estradiol (E2) and/or with 4-OH-TAM. The patterns of differential expression were determined by the ValiGen Gene IDentification (VGID) process, a subtractive hybridization approach combined with microarray validation screening. Their possible biologic consequences were evaluated by integrative data analysis. Over 1000 cDNA inserts were isolated and subsequently cloned, sequenced and analyzed against nucleotide and protein databases (NT/NR/EST) with BLAST software. We revealed that E2 induced differential expression of 279 known and 28 unknown sequences, whereas TAM affected the expression of 286 known and 14 unknown sequences. Integrative data analysis singled out a set of 32 differentially expressed genes apparently involved in broad cellular mechanisms. The presence of E2 modulated the expression patterns of 23 genes involved in anchors and junction remodeling; extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation; cell cycle progression, including G1/S check point and S-phase regulation; and synthesis of genotoxic metabolites. In tumor cells, these four mechanisms are associated with the acquisition of a motile and invasive phenotype. TAM partly reversed the E2-induced differential expression patterns and consequently restored most of the biologic functions deregulated by E2, except the mechanisms associated with cell cycle progression. Furthermore, we found that TAM affects the expression of nine additional genes associated with cytoskeletal remodeling, DNA repair, active estrogen receptor formation and growth factor synthesis, and mitogenic pathways. These modulatory effects of E2 and TAM upon the gene expression patterns identified here could explain some of the mechanisms associated with the acquisition of a more aggressive phenotype by breast cancer cells, such as E2-independent growth and TAM resistance.<newchar><newabs>10614648<newchar>The dramatic increase in uterine growth during late pregnancy and the generation of labor contractions require dynamic remodeling of myometrial smooth muscle-ECM interactions. In many tissues, such interactions are provided by focal adhesions; however, there are no data as to the expression of focal adhesion proteins or of focal adhesion signaling in the myometrium. In this study, we show that tyrosine phosphorylation of myometrial FAK (FAK-P-Tyr) and of its downstream substrate, paxillin, exhibited a &gt;10-fold increase during late pregnancy (days 15-22 of pregnancy) with each exhibiting a dramatic fall in P-Tyr on day 23 in association with the onset of labor. These changes in FAK-P-Tyr were paralleled by changes in FAK enzyme activity. Activated ERK1 and ERK2 expression remained relatively unchanged from day 15 to day 23, but decreased markedly 1 day post partum. Treatment of late pregnant rats with progesterone prevented the fall in FAK-P-Tyr/enzyme activity on day 23, and also blocked the onset of labor. These data suggest that progesterone (which decreases at term) modulates myometrial FAK activity/focal adhesion signaling and that these changes may underlie the tremendous remodeling that must occur in order for this muscle to develop optimal contractile activity during labor.<newchar><newabs>19157537<newchar>Dermal accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has increasingly been implicated as the underlying cause of delayed diabetic wound healing. Devising an in vitro model to adequately mimic glycated tissues will facilitate investigation into the mechanism of glycation in conjunction with exploration of new approaches or improvement of current therapies for treating diabetic chronic wounds. Collagen matrices were artificially glycated and the presence of AGEs was demonstrated by immunostaining. Both the mechanical properties of the collagen matrices and their interactions with fibroblasts (morphology, attachment, proliferation, and migration) were altered after glycation, moreover, there was evidence of impairment on extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling as well as inhibition of cell-induced material contraction. The actin cytoskeletons of the fibroblasts residing in the glycated collagen matrices were reorganized. In vivo mice full-thickness dermal wound models implanted with glycated collagen matrices showed delayed wound healing response. Thus, the glycated collagen matrix is an adequate in vitro model to mimic glycated tissues and could serve as a facile experimental tool to investigate the mechanism of glycation in conjunction with exploration of new approaches or improvement of current therapies for treating diabetic wounds.<newchar><newabs>19109427<newchar>Adhesion modulatory proteins are important effectors of cell-matrix interactions during tissue remodeling and regeneration. They comprise a diverse group of matricellular proteins that confer antiadhesive properties to the extracellular matrix (ECM). We compared the inhibitory effects of two adhesion modulatory proteins, fibulin-1 and tenascin-C, both of which bind to the C-terminal heparin-binding (HepII) domain of fibronectin (FN) but are structurally distinct. Here, we report that, like tenascin-C, fibulin-1 inhibits fibroblast spreading and cell-mediated contraction of a fibrin-FN matrix. These proteins act by modulation of focal adhesion kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling. The inhibitory effects were bypassed by lysophosphatidic acid, an activator of RhoA GTPase. Fibroblast response to fibulin-1, similar to tenascin-C, was dependent on expression of the heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-4, which also binds to the HepII domain. Therefore, blockade of HepII-mediated signaling by competitive binding of fibulin-1 or tenascin-C represents a shared mechanism of adhesion modulation among disparate modulatory proteins.<newchar><newabs>16360129<newchar>The post-myocardial infarction wound repair process involves temporarily overlapping phases that include inflammation, formation of granulation tissue, scar formation, and overall left ventricle (LV) remodelling. The myocardial extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in maintaining the structural and functional integrity of the heart and is centrally involved in wound repair post-myocardial infarction (MI). The main proteolytic system involved in the degradation of the ECM in the heart is the matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) system. The present review will focus on the importance of the unique temporal and spatial window of MMPs and their inhibitors (TIMPs) within the different wound healing phases post-MI. It summarizes (1) the MMP/TIMP levels at different time points post-MI, (2) the alterations seen in post-MI healing in genetically modified mice, and (3) the effects and limitations of therapeutic MMP-inhibition post-MI.<newchar><newabs>19132220<newchar>Overexpression of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (SERPINE1, PAI-1), the major physiological inhibitor of pericellular plasmin generation, is a significant causative factor in the progression of vascular disorders (e.g. arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, perivascular fibrosis) as well as a biomarker and a predictor of cardiovascular-disease associated mortality. PAI-1 is a temporal/spatial regulator of pericellular proteolysis and ECM accumulation impacting, thereby, vascular remodeling, smooth muscle cell migration, proliferation and apoptosis. Within the specific context of TGF-beta1-initiated vascular fibrosis and neointima formation, PAI-1 is a member of the most prominently expressed subset of TGF-beta1-induced transcripts. Recent findings implicate EGFR/pp60c-src--&gt;MEK/ERK1/2 and Rho/ROCK--&gt;SMAD2/3 signaling in TGF-beta1-stimulated PAI-1 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells. The EGFR is a direct upstream regulator of MEK/ERK1/2 while Rho/ROCK modulate both the duration of SMAD2/3 phosphorylation and nuclear accumulation. E-box motifs (CACGTG) in the PE1/PE2 promoter regions of the human PAI-1 gene, moreover, are platforms for a MAP kinase-directed USF subtype switch (USF-1--&gt;USF-2) in response to growth factor addition suggesting that the EGFR--&gt;MEK/ERK axis impacts PAI-1 expression, at least partly, through USF-dependent transcriptional controls. This paper reviews recent data suggesting the essential cooperativity among the EGFR--&gt;MAP kinase cascade, the Rho/ROCK pathway and SMADs in TGF-beta1-initiated PAI-1 expression. The continued clarification of mechanistic controls on PAI-1 transcription may lead to new targeted therapies and clinically-relevant options for the treatment of vascular diseases in which PAI-1 dysregulation is a major underlying pathogenic feature.<newchar><newabs>18642132<newchar>Integrity of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is essential for maintaining the normal structure and function of connective tissues. ECM is secreted locally by cells and organized into a complex meshwork providing physical support to cells, tissues, and organs. Initially thought to act only as a scaffold, the ECM is now known to provide a myriad of signals to cells regulating all aspects of their phenotype from morphology to differentiation. Matricellular proteins are a class of ECM related molecules defined through their ability to modulate cell-matrix interactions. Matricellular proteins are expressed at high levels during development, but typically only appear in postnatal tissue in wound repair or disease, where their levels increase substantially. Members of the CCN family, tenascin-C, osteopontin, secreted protein acidic rich in cysteine (SPARC), bone sialoprotein, thrombospondins, and galectins have all been classed as matricellular proteins. Periostin, a 90 kDa secreted homophilic cell adhesion protein, was recently added to matricellular class of proteins based on its expression pattern and function during development as well as in wound repair. Periostin is expressed in connective tissues including the periodontal ligament, tendons, skin and bone, and is also prominent in neoplastic tissues, cardiovascular disease, as well as in connective tissue wound repair. This review will focus on the functional role of periostin in tissue physiology. Fundamentally, it appears that periostin influences cell behaviour as well as collagen fibrillogenesis, and therefore exerts control over the structural and functional properties of connective tissues in both health and disease. Periostin is a novel matricellular protein with close homology to Drosophila fasciclin 1. In this review, the functional role of periostin is discussed in the context of connective tissue physiology, in development, disease, and wound repair.<newchar><newabs>18446277<newchar>There is a growing body of work in the literature that demonstrates the significant differences between 2D versus 3D environments in cell morphologies, spatial organization, cell-ECM interactions, and cell signaling. The 3D environments are generally considered more realistic tissue models both because they offer cells a surrounding environment rather than just a planar surface with which to interact, and because they provide the potential for more diverse mechanical environments. Many studies have examined cellular-mediated contraction of 3D matrices; however, because the 3D environment is much more complex and the scale more difficult to study, little is known regarding how mechanical environment, cell and collagen architecture, and collagen remodeling are linked. In the current work, we examine the spatial arrangement of neonatal cardiac fibroblasts and the associated collagen organization in constrained and unconstrained collagen gels over a 24 h period. Collagen gels that are constrained by their physical attachment to a mold and similar gels, which have been detached (unconstrained) from the mold and subsequently contract, offer two simple mechanical models by which the mechanisms of tissue homeostasis and wound repair might be examined. Our observations suggest the presence of two mechanical regimes in the unconstrained gels: an outer ring where cells orient circumferentially and local collagen aligns with the elongated cells; and a central region where unaligned stellate/bipolar cells are radially surrounded by collagen, similar to that seen throughout constrained gels. The evolving organization of cell alignment and surrounding collagen organization suggests that cellular response may be due to the cellular perception of the apparent stiffness of local physical environment.<newchar><newabs>18673209<newchar>Today there exists only one FDA-approved treatment for ischemic stroke; i.e., the serine protease tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA). In the aftermath of the failed stroke clinical trials with the nitrone spin trap/radical scavenger, NXY-059, a number of articles raised the question: are we doing the right thing? Is the animal research truly translational in identifying new agents for stroke treatment? This review summarizes the current state of affairs with plasminogen activators in thrombolytic therapy. In addition to therapeutic value, potential side effects of tPA also exist that aggravate stroke injury and offset the benefits provided by reperfusion of the occluded artery. Thus, combinational options (ultrasound alone or with microspheres/nanobubbles, mechanical dissociation of clot, activated protein C (APC), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), neuroserpin and CDP-choline) that could offset tPA toxic side effects and improve efficacy are also discussed here. Desmoteplase, a plasminogen activator derived from the saliva of Desmodus rotundus vampire bat, antagonizes vascular tPA-induced neurotoxicity by competitively binding to low-density lipoprotein related-receptors (LPR) at the blood-brain barrier (BBB) interface, minimizing the tPA uptake into brain parenchyma. tPA can also activate matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of endopeptidases comprised of 24 mammalian enzymes that primarily catalyze the turnover and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). MMPs have been implicated in BBB breakdown and neuronal injury in the early times after stroke, but also contribute to vascular remodeling, angiogenesis, neurogenesis and axonal regeneration during the later repair phase after stroke. tPA, directly or by activation of MMP-9, could have beneficial effects on recovery after stroke by promoting neurovascular repair through vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). However, any treatment regimen directed at MMPs must consider their pleiotropic nature and the likelihood of either beneficial or detrimental effects that might depend on the timing of the treatment in relation to the stage of brain injury.<newchar><newabs>19061246<newchar>The purpose of this study was to develop and test a novel culture model for studying fibroblast migration in 3-D collagen matrices. Human corneal fibroblasts were seeded within dense, randomly oriented compressed collagen matrices. A 6 mm diameter button of this cell-seeded matrix was placed in the middle of an acellular, less dense outer collagen matrix. These constructs were cultured for 1, 3, 5 or 7 days in serum-free media, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), or 50 ng/ml PDGF. Constructs were then fixed and labeled with AlexaFluor 546 phalloidin (for f-actin) and TOTO-3 (for nuclei). Cell-matrix interactions were assessed using a combination of fluorescent and reflected light confocal imaging. Human corneal fibroblasts in serum-free media showed minimal migration into the outer (non-compressed) matrix. In contrast, culture in serum or PDGF stimulated cell migration. Cell-induced collagen matrix reorganization in the outer matrix could be directly visualized using reflected light imaging, and was highest following culture in 10% FBS. Cellular contraction in 10% FBS often led to alignment of cells parallel to the outer edge of the inner matrix, similar to the pattern observed during corneal wound healing following incisional surgery. Overall, this 3-D model allows the effects of different culture conditions on cell migration and matrix remodeling to be assessed simultaneously. In addition, the design allows for ECM density, geometry and mechanical constraints to be varied in a controlled fashion. These initial results demonstrate differences in cell and matrix patterning during migration in response to serum and PDGF.<newchar><newabs>18524244<newchar>Biglycan, a small leucine-rich proteoglycan, has been shown to interact with extracellular matrix (ECM) collagen and may influence fibrillogenesis. We hypothesized that biglycan contributes to post-myocardial infarction (MI) scar development and that the absence of biglycan would result in altered scar structure and mechanics. Anterior MI was induced in biglycan hemizygous null and wild-type mice by permanent ligation of the left coronary artery. The initial extent of ischemic injury was similar in the two groups, as was the infarct size after 30 days, although there was some tendency toward reduced expansion in the biglycan-null. Electron microscopy revealed that collagen fibrils had a smaller average diameter and a narrower range in the biglycan-null scar, as well as appearing more densely packed. In vivo strain analysis showed that biglycan-null scars were stiffer than the wild-type. Remote LV collagen concentration tended to be reduced in biglycan-null hearts, but the difference was not statistically significant. Null-expression of biglycan may alter collagen fibril ultrastructure, and thereby influence scar mechanics and remodeling.<newchar><newabs>18060181<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) occupy a central role in embryogenesis and in normal physiological conditions, such as proliferation, cell motility, remodeling, wound healing, angiogenesis, and key reproductive events. MMPs form a multigenic family of proteolytic, zinc-dependent enzymes, with 26 members described until present, displaying multidomain structures and substrate specificities. MMPs are involved in both the turnover and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and in the processing, activation, or deactivation of a variety of soluble factors. They are regulated at the level of transcription, activation of the precursor zymogens, and inhibition mainly by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Any loss in activity control may result in various diseases. This review provides an update of biological functions of MMPs, facilitating the understanding of the complex pathogenic mechanisms of medical conditions characterized by imbalance between MMP and TIMP expression. The design of potent specific inhibitors for MMPs represents a scientific challenge for the development of new therapies.<newchar><newabs>19025595<newchar>Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) regulate diverse processes, including extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, and growth factors and their receptors' activities through the inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Recent evidence has shown that this family of four members (TIMP-1 to TIMP-4) can also control other important processes, such as proliferation and apoptosis, by a mechanism independent of their MMP inhibitory actions. Of these inhibitors, the most recently identified and least studied is TIMP-4. Initially cloned in human and, later, in mouse, TIMP-4 expression is restricted to heart, kidney, pancreas, colon, testes, brain and adipose tissue. This restricted expression suggests specific and different physiological functions. The present review summarizes the information available for this protein and also provides a putative structural model in order to propose potential relevant directions toward solving its function and role in diseases such as cancer.<newchar><newabs>18776053<newchar>Hyaluronan (HA), a large glycosaminoglycan found in the ECM, has major roles in lung and vascular biology and disease. However, its role in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) is unknown. We hypothesized that HA metabolism is abnormal in IPAH. We measured the plasma levels of HA in IPAH and healthy individuals. We also evaluated HA synthesis and the expression of HA synthases and hyaluronidases in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) from explanted lungs. Plasma HA levels were markedly elevated in IPAH compared with controls [HA (ng/ml, mean +/- SD): IPAH 325 +/- 80, control 28 +/- 9; P = 0.02]. In vitro, unstimulated IPAH PASMCs produced high levels of HA compared with control cells [HA in supernatant (microg/ml, mean +/- SD): IPAH 12 +/- 2, controls 6 +/- 0.9; P = 0.04]. HA levels were also higher in IPAH PASMC lysates. The increased HA was biologically relevant as shown by tissue staining and increased HA-specific binding of mononuclear cells to IPAH compared with control PASMCs [number of bound cells x 10(4) (mean +/- SD): IPAH 9.5 +/- 3, control 3.0 +/- 1; P = 0.01]. This binding was abrogated by the addition of hyaluronidase. HA synthase-2 and hyaluronidase-2 were predominant in control and IPAH PASMCs. Interestingly, the expressions of HA synthase-2 and hyaluronidase-2 were approximately 2-fold lower in IPAH compared with controls [HA synthase-2 (relative expression mean +/- SE): IPAH 4.3 +/- 0.02, control 7.8 +/- 0.1; P = 0.0004; hyaluronidase-2 (relative expression mean +/- SE): IPAH 4.2 +/- 0.06, control 7.6 +/- 0.07; P = 0.008]. Thus patients with IPAH have higher circulating levels of HA, and PASMCs derived from IPAH lungs produce more HA compared with controls. This is associated with increased tissue levels and increased binding of inflammatory cells suggesting a role for HA in remodeling and inflammation in IPAH.<newchar><newabs>19544310<newchar>CD30 is a costimulatory molecule of the TNF receptor superfamily, expressed on activated T and B cells. Previously, we have shown in a murine asthma model the crucial role of CD30 signaling for the development of this Th2-cell-mediated disease. In the present study, we investigated the role of CD30 in the maintenance of the immune response. In contrast to the acute model, in the chronic model CD30(-/-) mice developed a severe asthma-like phenotype with eosinophilic inflammation and high serum IgE levels. Collagen content, ECM protein deposition and proliferation of smooth muscle cells as signs for airway remodeling were equally increased in both CD30(-/-) and WT mice. Reduced expression of the costimulatory molecule OX40 on CD3(+) T cells in the acute and up-regulation in the chronic model indirectly supported a compensatory role of OX40 for CD30 signaling. In accordance, application of agonistic OX40 antibody restored the asthma phenotype in CD30(-/-) mice in the acute model, whereas chronic airway inflammation was reduced in the presence of an inhibitory anti-OX40 ligand antibody. These data demonstrate that the crucial role of CD30 signaling in the development of acute asthma may be taken over by other costimulatory molecules like OX40 after long-term exposure to the antigen.<newchar><newabs>17652357<newchar>The endogenous proteinase inhibitors plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase type 1 (TIMP-1) are two distinct proteins with separate molecular pathways. However, a close relationship between PAI-1 and TIMP-1 has been proposed indicating some degree of functional overlap due to their involvement in ECM turnover, tissue remodeling, and cellular migration and signaling. To study the housekeeping physiological implications of PAI-1 and TIMP-1, we generated a combined PAI-1 and TIMP-1 gene-deficient mouse model. We present the results on generating this specific mouse model with particular emphasis on phenotypical characteristics, blood leukocyte counts, histology, and gene expression studies of PAI-1 and TIMP-1 in various organs. We observed a significant deviation in segregation of offspring only in male mice (P &lt; 0.01) predominantly caused by PAI-1 deficiency. In addition, the body weight in 3- and 20-wk-old male and 20-wk-old female mice was significantly different between genotypes (P &lt;or= 0.0008). Furthermore, blood leukocyte counts were significantly different between genotypes in 20-wk-old male mice (P &lt;or= 0.0002), whereas no significant differences were observed between genotypes in 20-wk-old female mice (P &gt;or= 0.13). Quantifying the relative expression of PAI-1 and TIMP-1 revealed upregulation of PAI-1 (P &lt; 0.001) in male mice only. Our data highlight the complex roles of PAI-1 and TIMP-1 on physiological parameters such as segregation of offspring (embryonic development and survival), body weight (metabolism), blood leukocyte counts (immunity), and gene expression (regulatory redundancy). We conclude that PAI-1 and TIMP-1 seem to possess gender-dependent regulatory properties on various housekeeping physiological parameters and stress the potential implications in pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>17602710<newchar>The concept of anti-angiogenesis therapy was introduced by Judah Folkman in 1971 and since then, a plethora of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors have been identified. In the recent years, it has become clear that angiogenesis, the formation of new capillaries from a pre-existing capillary network, is highly regulated by the action of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors. In the healthy adult organism the &quot;angiogenic-switch&quot; is likely turned &quot;Off&quot;, i. e. anti-angiogenic factors are likely counteracting the pro-angiogenic factors resulting in a non-angiogenic state. Angiogenesis is encountered during wound healing processes, the female menstrual cycle and endometrial remodeling, as well as during embryonic development and organ growth. In the pathological setting, angiogenesis plays an important role in different diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy, and tumor growth. In this regard, recent studies have described several endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis, with a subset derived from extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. This review will particularly focus on the type IV collagen-derived angiogenesis inhibitors Arresten, Canstatin and Tumstatin.<newchar><newabs>17275314<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a large family of calcium-dependent zinc-containing endopeptidases, which are responsible for the tissue remodeling and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), including collagens, elastins, gelatin, matrix glycoproteins, and proteoglycan. They are regulated by hormones, growth factors, and cytokines, and are involved in ovarian functions. MMPs are excreted by a variety of connective tissue and pro-inflammatory cells including fibroblasts, osteoblasts, endothelial cells, macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes. These enzymes are expressed as zymogens, which are subsequently processed by other proteolytic enzymes (such as serine proteases, furin, plasmin, and others) to generate the active forms. Matrix metalloproteinases are considered as promising targets for the treatment of cancer due to their strong involvement in malignant pathologies. Clinical/preclinical studies on MMP inhibition in tumor models brought positive results raising the idea that the development of strategies to inhibit MMPs may be proved to be a powerful tool to fight against cancer. However, the presence of an inherent flexibility in the MMP active-site limits dramatically the accurate modeling of MMP-inhibitor complexes. The interest in the application of quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs) has steadily increased in recent decades and we hope it may be useful in elucidating the mechanisms of chemical-biological interactions for this enzyme. In the present review, an attempt has been made to explore the in-depth knowledge from the classification of this enzyme to the clinical trials of their inhibitors. A total number of 92 QSAR models (44 published and 48 new formulated QSAR models) have also been presented to understand the chemical-biological interactions. QSAR results on the inhibition of various compound series against MMP-1, -2, -3, -7, -8, -9, -12, -13, and -14 reveal a number of interesting points. The most important of these are hydrophobicity and molar refractivity, which are the most important determinants of the activity.<newchar><newabs>17477726<newchar>Tissue remodeling during maturation, wound healing, and response to vascular stress involves molecular changes of collagen and elastin in the extracellular matrix (ECM). Two optical techniques are effective for investigating these changes--laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy and polarizing microscopy. LIF spectroscopy integrates the signal from both elastin and collagen cross-linked structure, whereas birefringence is a measure of only collagen. Our purpose is (1) to evaluate the rat tail tendon (RTT) spectroscopy against data from purified extracted protein standards and (2) to correlate the two optical techniques in the study of RTT and skin. Spectra from tissue samples from 27 male rats and from extracted elastin and collagen were obtained using LIF spectroscopy (357 nm). Birefringence was measured on 5-mum histological sections of the same tissue. Morphometric analysis reveals that elastin represents approximately 10% of tendon volume and contributes to RTT fluorescence. RTT maximum fluorescence emission intensity (FEI(max)), which includes collagen and elastin, increases with animal weight (R(2)=0.64). Birefringence, when plotted against weight, increases to a plateau (nonlinear correlation: R(2)=0.90), tendon having greater birefringence than skin. LIF spectroscopy and collagen fiber birefringence are shown to provide complementary measurements of molecular structure (tendon birefringence versus FEI(max) at R(2)=0.60).<newchar><newabs>16674194<newchar>Current research has revealed the importance of a class of cell surface proteins called integrins in various vital physiological functions such as blood clotting, regulation of blood pressure, tissue blood flow, and vascular remodeling. The key to integrin functionality is its ability to mediate force transmission by interacting with the extracellular matrix and cytoskeleton. In addition, they play a role in signal transduction via their connection with the proteins in focal adhesion (FA) points. To understand the complex mechanism of cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion that is responsible for these diverse biochemical interactions, it is necessary to identify the integrins on cells and monitor their interaction with various ligands. To this end, for the first time, we employ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) to detect integrins. The results show the capability using SERS to detect the integrins to the nanomolar concentration regime and to distinguish between two different kinds of integrins, alphaVbeta3 and alpha5beta1, that are present in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). It is anticipated that the SERS approach will potentially help elucidate the mechanism of integrin-ligand interactions in a variety of phenomena of physiological importance.<newchar><newabs>16563230<newchar>A dynamic, complex relationship exists between tumor cells and their microenvironment, which plays a pivotal role in cancer progression, yet remains poorly understood. Particularly perplexing is the finding that aggressive melanoma cells express genes associated with multiple cellular phenotypes, in addition to their ability to form vasculogenic-like networks in three-dimensional matrix--called vasculogenic mimicry, which is illustrative of tumor cell plasticity. This study addressed the unique epigenetic effect of the microenvironment of aggressive melanoma cells on the behavior of poorly aggressive melanoma cells exposed to it. The data show significant changes in the global gene expression of the cells exposed to 3-D matrices preconditioned by aggressive melanoma cells, including the acquisition of a vasculogenic cell phenotype, upregulation of ECM remodeling genes, and increased invasive ability--indicative of an epigenetic, microenvironment-induced reprogramming of poorly aggressive melanoma cells. However, this epigenetic effect was completely abrogated when a highly cross-linked collagen matrix was used, which could not be remodeled by the aggressive melanoma cells. These findings offer an unique perspective of the inductive properties associated with an aggressive melanoma microenvironment that might provide new insights into the epigenetic regulation of tumor cell plasticity and differentiation, as well as mechanisms that could be targeted for novel therapeutic strategies.<newchar><newabs>16571779<newchar>Asbestos is a known inflammatory, carcinogenic, and fibrotic agent, but the mechanisms leading to asbestos-induced lung diseases are unclear. Using a murine inhalation model of fibrogenesis, we show that asbestos causes significant increases in mRNA levels of lung matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs 12 and 13) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP1), as well as increased activities of MMP 2, 9, and 12 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALF). Asbestos-exposed PKCdelta knockout (PKCdelta-/-) mice exhibited decreased expression of lung MMP12 and MMP13 compared with asbestos-exposed wild-type mice. Studies using small molecule inhibitors in murine alveolar epithelial type II cells (C10) and primary lung fibroblasts confirmed that asbestos transcriptionally up-regulates MMPs via an EGFR (or other growth factor receptors)/PI3K/PKCdelta/ERK1/2 pathway. Moreover, use of a broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor showed that MMPs play an important role in further enhancing asbestos-induced signaling events by activating EGFR. These data reveal a potentially important link between asbestos signaling and integrity of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that likely contributes to asbestos-induced lung remodeling and diseases.<newchar><newabs>16309711<newchar>This study investigated whether integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is involved in the pathogenesis of chronic glomerulonephritis (GN) by analyzing the expression and activity of glomerular ILK in a chronic rat model of mesangioproliferative GN. Double immunostaining of kidneys obtained at different time points with glomerular cell-specific markers revealed that ILK was primarily expressed by glomerular epithelial cells, and weakly by mesangial cells (MCs) and endothelial cells in control rats, but dramatically increased in a typical mesangial pattern at days 21 and 28 of GN. Semiquantitative assessment indicated that the level of glomerular ILK expression closely parallels the level of accumulation of glomerular extracellular matrix (ECM) as well as fibronectin (FN). Immunoprecipitation and kinase activity assays using isolated nephritic glomeruli indicated a striking increase of ILK activity on days 21 and 28 of GN. Further, cultured rat MCs overexpressing kinase-deficient ILK diminished FN assembly and collagen matrix remodeling as compared with control transfectants. The results showed that glomerular ILK expression and activity are markedly increased in an experimental model of chronic GN. Increased activity of ILK in MCs may contribute to the development of chronic mesangial alterations leading to glomerular scarring.<newchar><newabs>17139635<newchar>Angiogenesis (the growth of new blood vessels) is a complex multistep process that involves multiple cell types, numerous growth factors, and complex regulatory checks and balances. Tight control of vascular remodeling evolved to ensure stability of the vasculature while maintaining the body's ability to rapidly mount an angiogenic response requiring a high degree of plasticity. Angiogenesis is critical not only for physiological development, but also for the progression of pathologies, and is thus a target for therapeutic intervention. The importance of the process coupled with the ease of access for delivery of contrast agents makes the vasculature at large, and angiogenesis in particular, a favorable target of functional and molecular imaging. Recent developments in molecular imaging tools have expanded our views to encompass many components of the process. Functional imaging of blood volume, vessel permeability, and vasoreactivity is complemented by novel contrast agents that reveal specific targets on endothelial cells. Methods have been developed to label vascular cells so as to track their recruitment to sites of angiogenesis, and new &quot;smart&quot; contrast agents have been designed to reveal the activity of enzymatic reactions in altering the extracellular matrix (ECM) during angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>16495457<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been proposed to remodel the extracellular environment of neurons. Here, we report that the metalloproteinase membrane-type 5 MMP (MT5-MMP) binds to AMPA receptor binding protein (ABP) and GRIP (glutamate receptor interaction protein), two related postsynaptic density (PSD) PDZ (postsynaptic density-95/Discs large/zona occludens-1) domain proteins that target AMPA receptors to synapses. The MT5-MMP C terminus binds ABP PDZ5 and the two proteins coimmunoprecipitated and colocalized in heterologous cells and neurons. MT5-MMP localized in filopodia at the tips of growth cones in young [2-5 d in vitro (DIV)] cultured embryonic hippocampal neurons, and at synapses in mature (21 DIV) neurons. Its enrichment in synaptosomes also indicated a synaptic localization in the mature brain. Deletion of the PDZ binding site impaired membrane trafficking of MT5-MMP, whereas exogenous ABP splice forms that are associated either with the plasma membrane or with the cytosol, respectively, colocalized with MT5-MMP in synaptic spines or recruited MT5-MMP to intracellular compartments. We show that endogenous MT5-MMP is found in cultured neurons and brain lysates in a proenzyme form that is activated by furin and degraded by auto-proteolysis. We also identify cadherins as MT5-MMP substrates. These results suggest that ABP directs MT5-MMP proteolytic activity to growth cones and synaptic sites in neurons, where it may regulate axon pathfinding or synapse remodeling through proteolysis of cadherins or other ECM or cell adhesion molecules.<newchar><newabs>16390324<newchar>To form tumors successfully at sites remote from the primary tumor, metastatic cells must be endowed with particular properties. They must detach from the primary tumor and enter the blood circulation, where they must resist hemodynamic shearstress, &quot;home&quot; to the target organ, successfully extravasate, and then migrate through dense stroma to a site favorable for tumor growth. Recent results with genetically engineered mouse models have generated data which clearly challenge the classic dogma stating that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) promote metastasis solely by modulating the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). Instead, it is becoming clear that MMPs and their natural inhibitors have multiple biological functions that not only challenge our view on how MMPs promote metastasis, but also raise for the first time the idea that secretion of MMPs by the host could protect it from tumor growth, at least in some types of cancer or at specific stages of tumor progression.<newchar><newabs>17213041<newchar>To investigate simultaneously localization and relative activity of MMPs during extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rat, we analyzed the time course of the expression, activity and/or concentration of gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, collagenase MMP-1, matrylisin MMP-7, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, both in alveolar space (cellular and extracellular compartments) and in lung tissue. MMP and TIMP expression was detected (immunohistochemistry) in lung tissue. MMP activity (zymography) and TIMP concentration (ELISA) were evaluated in lung tissue homogenate (LTH), BAL supernatant (BALs) and BAL cell pellet (BALp) 3, 7, 14, and 28 days after bleomycin intratracheal instillation. Immunohistochemistry showed an extensive MMP and TIMP expression from day 7 in a wide range of structural and inflammatory cells in treated rats. MMP-2 was present mainly in epithelia, MMP-9 in inflammatory cells. MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity was increased respectively in BAL fluid and BAL cells, with a peak at day 7. TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 concentration (ELISA) enhancement was delayed at day 14. In conclusion gelatinases and their inhibitors are significantly activated during bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Marked changes in gelatinases activity are observed early in the alveolar compartment, with a prevailing extracellular activity of MMP-2 and a predominant intracellular distribution of MMP-9, while enzyme activity changes in lung parenchyma were less evident. In the repairing phase the reduction of gelatinases activity is synchronous with a peak of alveolar concentration of their inhibitors.<newchar><newabs>17264171<newchar>Genome-wide gene expression profiling of skeletal muscle from Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients has been used to describe muscle tissue alterations in DMD children older than 5 years. By studying the expression profile of 19 patients younger than 2 years, we describe with high resolution the gene expression signature that characterizes DMD muscle during the initial or &quot;presymptomatic&quot; phase of the disease. We show that in the first 2 years of the disease, DMD muscle is already set to express a distinctive gene expression pattern considerably different from the one expressed by normal, age-matched muscle. This &quot;dystrophic&quot; molecular signature is characterized by a coordinate induction of genes involved in the inflammatory response, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and muscle regeneration, and the reduced transcription of those involved in energy metabolism. Despite the lower degree of muscle dysfunction experienced, our younger patients showed abnormal expression of most of the genes reported as differentially expressed in more advanced stages of the disease. By analyzing our patients as a time series, we provide evidence that some genes, including members of three pathways involved in morphogenetic signaling-Wnt, Notch, and BMP-are progressively induced or repressed in the natural history of DMD.<newchar><newabs>16716595<newchar>Inhibitors for matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are under investigation for the treatment of various important chronic illnesses, including cancer, arthritis, and cardiovascular disease (CVD). In particular, MMP-13 is currently being probed as a potential key target in CVD and malignant disease due to its documented effects on extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, important in the pathophysiology of these diseases. Within the family of related mammalian MMP enzymes, MMP-13 possesses a large hydrophobic binding pocket relative to that of other MMPs. Homochiral astaxanthin (3S,3'S-AST; 3S,3'S-dihydroxy-beta,beta-carotene-4,4'-dione), an important antioxidant and anti-inflammatory xanthophyll carotenoid, is an active metabolite of several novel soft drugs in clinical development; it is also extensively used and tested as a human nutraceutical. In the current study, the prediction of the geometry and energetics of its binding to human MMP-13 was conducted with molecular modeling. The method used was found to predict the energy of binding of known ligands of MMP-13 with great precision. Blind docking using the whole protein target was then used in order to identify the possible binding site(s) of AST. AST was predicted to bind at several sites in close proximity to the active center. Subsequent analyses focused on the binding site at the atomic (i.e., amino acid sequence) level suggested that AST can bind to MMP-13 with high affinity and favorable energetics. Therefore, the modeling study predicts potential direct enzyme-inhibitory activity of AST against MMP-13, a behavior that may be exploited in mammalian systems in which pathological upregulation of MMP activity is paramount.<newchar><newabs>16133923<newchar>The aortic valve functions in a complex mechanical environment which leads to force-dependent cellular and tissue responses. Characterization of these responses provides a fundamental understanding of valve pathogenesis. The aim of this work was to study the biological characteristics of native porcine aortic valves cultured in an ex vivo pulsatile organ culture system capable of maintaining physiological pressures (120/80 mmHg) and cardiac output (4.2 l/min). Collagen, sGAG and elastin contents of the valve leaflets were measured and cusp morphology, cell phenotype, cell proliferation and apoptosis were examined. Presence of endothelial cells (ECs) on the leaflet surface was also evaluated. The differences in collagen, sGAG and elastin contents were not significant (p &gt; 0.05) between the cultured and fresh valve leaflets. The cultured valves maintained the native ECM composition of the leaflets while preserving the morphology and cell phenotype. Cell phenotype in leaflets incubated statically under atmospheric conditions decreased compared to fresh and cultured valve leaflets, indicating the importance of mechanical forces in maintaining the natural biology of the valve leaflets. ECs were retained on the surfaces of cultured leaflets with no remodeling of the leaflets. The number of apoptotic cells in the cultured leaflets was significantly (p &lt; 0.05) less than in the statically incubated leaflets and comparable to fresh leaflets. The sterile ex vivo organ culture system thus maintained the viability and native biological characteristics of the aortic valves that were cultured under dynamic conditions for a period of 48 h.<newchar><newabs>16153003<newchar>During kidney development many proteases are involved with the remodeling process of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during nephrogenesis. This study used embryonic kidneys culture, tridimensional cell culture, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques in order to investigate the expression of cathepsins S (CS) and cathepsin H (CH) during metanephrogenesis and their functional interface with hepatic growth factor (HGF) and nerve growth factor (NGF). Results have shown that cathepsin S has been expressed early than the cathepsin H in the nephrogenesis. NGF antibody in the embryonic kidney cultures, in a dose-dependent mechanism inhibited the CS but not CH genic expression by RT-PCR. The tridimensional cells culture with MDCK and IMCD cells confirmed the interface between HGF and CS and CH once their inhibitors added to the culture, reduced the fancy branching formation induced by this growth factor. In summary, this study suggests that CS and CH are differently expressed during nephrogenesis and also that they are involved with the tubulogenesis probably mediating specific growth factors such as NGF and HGF.<newchar><newabs>16118446<newchar>Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is a prototypic multifunctional cytokine whose broad modulatory mechanisms affect numerous biological functions both at the cell and organism levels. These include, but are not limited to, control of immune functions, embryogenesis, carcinogenesis, tissue responses to injury, cell proliferation, extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and degradation, and cell migration. The identification of Smad proteins, TGF-beta receptor kinase substrates that translocate into the cell nucleus to act as transcription factors, has increased our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying TGF-beta action. This introductory chapter will outline the current knowledge on how specific signals initiated by the TGF-beta receptors are brought to the nucleus to regulate gene expression, with a specific emphasis on how such signaling relates to connective tissue remodeling, repair, and fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>15987643<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors play important roles in the remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM). MMP-26, also called endometase or matrilysin-2, is a novel member of the MMP family. The present study was to investigate the temporal and spatial expression of MMP-26 mRNA in mouse uterus during the estrous cycle and early pregnancy by using in situ hybridization and semi-quantitative RT-PCR. In this study, MMP-26 mRNA was found to be localized to the luminal and glandular epithelium at proestrus and estrus, and the expression level was decreased significantly from metestrus to dioestrus. During pre-implantation period, MMP-26 mRNA was predominantly expressed in luminal and glandular epithelium at much higher level; whereas it switched to stroma during peri-implantation period, and also appeared in the blastocysts and the implantation sites. The results suggested that MMP-26 might play a role in the cycling changes of mouse uterus during the estrous cycle and embryo implantation.<newchar><newabs>15781317<newchar>Cutaneous melanomas are notorious for their tendency to metastasize. Essential steps in this process are the degradation of basement membranes and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by proteolytic enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are regulated by their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs). An MMP expression is not restricted to tumor cells but is also found in stromal cells, indicating that stroma-derived proteases may contribute to melanoma progression. The MMPs have been shown to interact with a broad range of non-matrix proteins including adhesion molecules, growth factors and mediators of angiogenesis and apoptosis. In this review, we evaluate new insights into the interplay of MMPs and their molecular partners in melanoma progression.<newchar><newabs>15350533<newchar>In the field of biomechanics, collagen fibrils are believed to be robust mechanical structures characterized by a low extensibility. Until very recently, information on the mechanical properties of collagen fibrils could only be derived from ensemble measurements performed on complete tissues such as bone, skin, and tendon. Here, we measure force-elongation/relaxation profiles of single collagen fibrils using atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based force spectroscopy (FS). The elongation profiles show that in vitro-assembled human type I collagen fibrils are characterized by a large extensibility. Numerous discontinuities and a plateau in the force profile indicate major reorganization occurring within the fibrils in the 1.5- to 4.5-nN range. Our study demonstrates that newly assembled collagen fibrils are robust structures with a significant reserve of elasticity that could play a determinant role in the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling associated with tissue growth and morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>15253387<newchar>We examined effects of recombinant hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) on cutaneous wound healing, using a full-thickness cutaneous excision model in diabetic mice. Topical administration of HGF, as well as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), promoted the rate of wound closure and re-epithelialization. Both HGF and bFGF enhanced expansion of the granulation tissue and stimulated neovascularization on day 7 postwounding, wherein the increase in microvessel density in HGF-treated wounds was higher than that in bFGF-treated wounds. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) activities involved in cell migration, angiogenesis, and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, were enhanced by HGF-treatment on day 7. On day 28 postwounding (later stages of wound healing), granulation tissue in bFGF-treated wounds remained to a greater extent than that seen in saline- and HGF-treated wounds. Likewise, bFGF- but not HGF-treatment stimulated DNA synthesis of fibroblasts in granulation tissue, suggesting that HGF stimulates wound healing with lesser degree of susceptibility to cutaneous scarring. We propose that supplement of HGF may be a potential therapeutic approach for treatment of cutaneous ulcer.<newchar><newabs>14582707<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) specially degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and are involved in tissue remodeling and angiogenesis. Therefore, studies on the role of MMPs in the carcinogenesis, proliferation and infiltration of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) may greatly contribute to the development of a new clinically applicable therapeutic approach. In the present study, we immunologically examined the expression rates of various MMPs including MMP-2, 3, 7, 9, membrane type 1-MMP (MT1-MMP), and MT2-MMP in the cancerous and noncancerous areas of resected tumor specimens from 30 patients with primary HCC. The rate of MMP-2 expression was high for both cancerous and noncancerous areas. However, the expression rates of MMP-3, MT1-MMP, and MT2-MMP were significantly higher in cancerous areas than in noncancerous areas. Next, we examined the clinicopathologic features such as the number of tumor nodules, maximal tumor size, presence or absence of capsular infiltration and portal vein invasion, histological grades of HCCs, state of noncancerous areas (chronic hepatitis: CH or liver cirrhosis: LC), and short-term recurrence after resection (within six months). In conclusion, it was found that three main networks of MMPs are predominantly involved in the case of HCC, that is, MMP-2 and MT1-MMP in the carcinogenesis and progression, MMP-7 and MMP-9 in the capsular infiltration and portal vein invasion, as well as MMP-3 and MMP-7 in the progression of HCC. Furthermore, MT1-MMP appeared to be the most important factor in HCC because of its widespread pattern of expression.<newchar><newabs>16228907<newchar>Cell characteristics and phenotype depend on the nature of the extracellular matrix, the type and organization of integrins and cytoskeleton. The interactions between these components are poorly known at the myocyte level and during cardiac remodeling associated with cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. We analyze here the nature and organization of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, cytoskeleton and integrins and their regulation by growth factors, such as angiotensin II, in normal myocyte growth and in pathological growth (hypertrophy) of the myocardium and heart failure.<newchar><newabs>12749936<newchar>At estrus, the oviduct undergoes endocrine-induced changes which provide an essential microenvironment for maturation of gametes, fertilization and embryonic development. Several oviduct expressed proteins which interact with gametes or embryos, including the oviduct-specific, estrogen-dependent glycoprotein (OGP), have been identified and characterized. The objective of the present study was to identify, characterize and localize other proteins expressed by the porcine oviduct during estrus that may function in an autocrine or paracrine manner to enhance fertilization and embryonic development. Oviducts were collected during the estrous cycle or early pregnancy, flushed and divided into functional segments, and portions of the infundibulum, ampulla and isthmus were fixed for immunocytochemical analysis or cultured. Culture media was semi-purified by heparin-agarose affinity chromatography, proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane after two-dimensional (2D)-SDS-PAGE and three different proteins were identified, excised and subjected to N-terminal amino acid analysis. These proteins were identified as complement component C3b, the carboxy-terminal propeptide of alpha 1 (III) procollagen (PIIICP), and the heavy chain variable region of IgA. Electrophoresis and fluorography of media from Days 0 to 12 of early pregnancy or the estrous cycle revealed both spatial and temporal expression of C3b and IgA heavy chain but not PIIICP by the oviduct. Further, all three proteins were identified in oviduct fluid by electrophoresis, immunoblot or immunoprecipitation analysis. Complement component C3b and IgA heavy chain were immunolocalized in all three oviduct segments on all days; however, temporal and spatial differences were demonstrated. Staining was greater in the infundibulum and during estrus for all three identified proteins. In summary, three proteins expressed by the oviduct at estrus and during early pregnancy were identified; characterization and localization suggest they may play a critical role in protecting the luminal environment, participating in ECM remodeling and gamete interactions.<newchar><newabs>12866027<newchar>We surveyed the expression of 557 cancer-related genes in 15 cases of well-differentiated OSCC by cDNA microarray analysis. To identify potential biomarkers for lymph node metastasis, all microarray data were compared by the Mann-Whitney test and the significance analysis of microarrays between OSCCs with and those without lymph node metastasis. The tissues of OSCCs with lymph node metastasis exhibited increased expression levels of MMP-1, MMP-3, uPA, integrin-alpha3, paxillin, tenascin C and IL-6 transcripts. All of these genes were included in common clusters on the Cluster/TreeView analysis, implying that functional gene groups of proteolytic enzymes and integrin-related molecules are involved in cervical lymph node metastasis. The results of RTQ-PCR for differentially expressed genes were in accord with those of cDNA microarray analyses, suggesting that the data obtained by microarray gene expression analyses were valid. Consistent with cooperative expression patterns, immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that products of MMP-1, MMP-3 and uPA were colocalized to components of the neoplastic stroma, particularly mononuclear inflammatory cells with well-developed eosinophilic cytoplasm. Our results suggest that expression levels of molecules involved in tissue remodeling and cell-ECM adhesion, especially MMP-1 and integrin-alpha3, can provide an accurate biomarker system for predicting the risk of cervical lymph node metastasis in OSCC.<newchar><newabs>17616748<newchar>Wnt1-induced secreted protein-1 (WISP-1) is a member of the cysteine-rich 61, connective tissue growth factor, and nephroblastoma overexpressed (CCN) family of growth factors and is expressed in the heart at low basal levels. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether WISP-1 is upregulated in postinfarct myocardium and whether WISP-1 exerts prohypertrophic and mitogenic effects stimulating myocyte hypertrophy, cardiac fibroblast (CF) proliferation, and collagen expression. Male C57Bl/6 (25 g) mice underwent permanent occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery. mRNA and protein levels were analyzed by Northern and Western blot analyses. Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was quantified by protein and DNA synthesis. CF proliferation was quantified by CyQuant assay, and soluble collagen release by Sircol assay. A time-dependent increase in WISP-1 expression was detected in vivo in the noninfarct zone of the left ventricle, which peaked at 24 h (3.1-fold, P &lt; 0.01). Similarly, biglycan expression was increased by 3.71-fold (P &lt; 0.01). IL-1beta and TNF-alpha expression preceded WISP-1 expression in vivo and stimulated WISP-1 expression in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes in vitro. WISP-1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was evidenced by increased protein (2.78-fold), but not DNA synthesis, and enhanced Akt phosphorylation and activity. Treatment of primary CF with WISP-1 significantly stimulated proliferation at 48 h (6,966 +/- 264 vs. 5,476 +/- 307 cells/well, P &lt; 0.01) and enhanced collagen release by 72 h (18.4 +/- 3.1 vs. 8.4 +/- 1.0 ng/cell, P &lt; 0.01). Our results demonstrate for the first time that WISP-1 and biglycan are upregulated in the noninfarcted myocardium in vivo, suggesting a positive amplification of WISP-1 signaling. WISP-1 stimulates cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibroblast proliferation, and ECM expression in vitro. These results suggest that WISP-1 may play a critical role in post-myocardial infarction remodeling.<newchar><newabs>12416781<newchar>In summary, the present commentary proposes a hypothesis that alveolar bone remodeling and bone loss in periodontitis, periodontal surgery, and in orthodontic tooth movement is triggered by a common &quot;strain relaxation&quot; signaling pathway of gingival and periodontal fibroblasts. The abrupt splitting, degradation, or relaxation of collagen fibers in the marginal periodontium produces a &quot;strain relaxation&quot; signal in the local fibroblasts which reside on these fibers, activating an ECM-integrin-cytoskeleton pathway. A cascade of cellular reactions which lead to osteoclastic bone resorption starting on the inner aspect (periodontal) of the alveolar bone then persists. A novel therapeutic approach is suggested here by using locally delivered drugs intervening in the cell contractile apparatus.<newchar><newabs>15446587<newchar>Hydrocephalus is a progressive brain disorder characterized by abnormalities in the flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and ventricular dilatation that leads to cerebral atrophy, and if left untreated, can be fatal. Genetic mutations, congenital malformations, infectious diseases, intracerebral hemorrhages and tumors are common conditions resulting in hydrocephalus. Although the causes of obstructive hydrocephalus are better understood, the mechanisms resulting in chronic, progressive communicating congenital and acquired hydrocephalus are less well understood. In this regard, recent studies in transgenic (tg) mice suggest that increased expression of cytokines such as TGF-beta1 might play an important role by disrupting the vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, promoting hemorrhages, and altering the reabsorption of CSF. In this context, the main objective of this manuscript is to provide an overview on the cellular and molecular mechanisms of hydrocephalus based on studies derived from tg and experimental animal models.<newchar><newabs>11690622<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of Zn2+-dependent endopeptidases targeting extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds as well as a number of other proteins. Their proteolytic activity acts as an effector mechanism of tissue remodeling in physiologic and pathologic conditions, and as modulator of inflammation. In the context of neuro-inflammatory diseases, MMPs have been implicated in processes such as (a) blood-brain barrier (BBB) and blood-nerve barrier opening, (b) invasion of neural tissue by blood-derived immune cells, (c) shedding of cytokines and cytokine receptors, and (d) direct cellular damage in diseases of the peripheral and central nervous system. This review focuses on the role of MMPs in multiple sclerosis (MS) and bacterial meningitis (BM), two neuro-inflammatory diseases where current therapeutic approaches are insufficient to prevent severe disability in the majority of patients. Inhibition of enzymatic activity may prevent MMP-mediated neuronal damage due to an overactive or deviated immune response in both diseases. Downregulation of MMP release may be the molecular basis for the beneficial effect of IFN-beta and steroids in MS. Instead, synthetic MMP inhibitors offer the possibility to shut off enzymatic activity of already activated MMPs. In animal models of MS and BM, they efficiently attenuated clinical disease symptoms and prevented brain damage due to excessive metalloproteinase activity. However, the required target profile for the therapeutic use of this novel group of compounds in human disease is not yet sufficiently defined and may be different depending on the type and stage of disease. Currently available MMP inhibitors show little target-specificity within the MMP family and may lead to side-effects due to interference with physiological functions of MMPs. Results from human MS and BM indicate that only a restricted number of MMPs specific for each disease is up-regulated. MMP inhibitors with selective target profiles offer the possibility of a more efficient therapy of MS and BM and may enter clinical trials in the near future.<newchar><newabs>12736828<newchar>MMP activities are controlled by a combination of proteolytic pro-enzyme activation steps and inhibition by endogenous inhibitors like alpha2-macroglobulin and the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). TIMPs are the key inhibitors in tissue. The expression of both MMPs and TIMPs is controlled during tissue remodeling to maintain a balance in the turnover of extracellular matrix. Disruption of this balance may result in a broad spectrum of diseases. Additionally, TIMP-2 has been reported to have growth factor activities. To further study the function of TIMP-2 in development, we utilized zebrafish as an experimental model system. We have successfully isolated a TIMP-2 homologue from zebrafish (zTIMP-2). This zebrafish TIMP-2 showed high similarity to human TIMP-2 with all critical features conserved. Whole-mount in situ analysis showed that zTIMP-2 was expressed as early as the one-cell stage indicating a maternal origin. This expression continued through later stages of development. RT-PCR analysis confirmed the early expression pattern from the 16-cell stage through blastula, gastrula and 24-h stages. In addition, at the protein level, immunoreactive zTIMP-2 was detected using antibody against recombinant human TIMP-2. RFP-reporter analysis indicated that TIMP-2 can be secreted into the extracellular space where ECM is forming. Functional studies showed that the balance of TIMP-2 expression is important to normal development as reflected by the fact that both blockage of TIMP-2 translation using antisense morpholino oligonculeotides or increased translation of TIMP-2 using a mRNA microinjection approach resulted in abnormal zebrafish development. This is in contrast to murine knockout studies that indicate that TIMP-2 does not have a major role in mouse embryogenesis.<newchar><newabs>11375412<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), or interstitial collagenase, has been hypothesized to contribute to the progression of the human atherosclerotic lesions by digesting the fibrillar collagens of the neointimal ECM. The apolipoprotein E knockout (apoE0) mouse model develops complex atherosclerotic lesions, but mice do not possess a homologue for MMP-1. To provide an in vivo evaluation of the role of MMP-1 in atherogenesis, we created a transgenic mouse model that expresses this enzyme specifically in the macrophage, under the control of the scavenger receptor A (SCAV) enhancer/promoter. The MMP-1 transgenic mice were crossed into the apoE0 background and fed an atherogenic diet for 16-25 weeks. Surprisingly, the transgenic mice demonstrated decreased lesion size compared with control littermates. The lesions of the transgenic animals were less extensive and immature, with fewer cellular layers and a diminished content of fibrillar collagen. There was no evidence of plaque rupture. Our data suggest that remodeling of the neointimal extracellular matrix by MMP-1 is beneficial in the progression of lesions.<newchar><newabs>11598905<newchar>Gelatinase A (MMP-2), a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) involved in tumor invasion and angiogenesis, is secreted as an inactive zymogen (proMMP-2) and activated by proteolytic cleavage. Here we report that polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN)-derived elastase, cathepsin G, and proteinase-3 activate proMMP-2 through a mechanism that requires membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) expression. Immunoprecipitation of human PMN-conditioned medium with a mixture of antibodies to elastase, cathepsin G, and proteinase-3 abolished proMMP-2 activation, whereas individual antibodies were ineffective. Incubation of HT1080 cells with either purified PMN elastase or cathepsin G or proteinase-3 resulted in dose-and time-dependent proMMP-2 activation. Addition of PMN-conditioned medium to MT1-MMP expressing cells resulted in increased proMMP-2 activation and in vitro invasion of extracellular matrix (ECM), but had no effect with cells that express no MT1-MMP. MMP-2 activation by PMN-conditioned medium or purified elastase was blocked by the elastase inhibitor alpha(1)-antitrypsin but not by Batimastat, an MMP inhibitor, showing that elastase activation of MMP-2 is not mediated by MMP activities. The PMN-conditioned medium-induced increase in cell invasion was blocked by Batimastat as well as by alpha(1)-antitrypsin, showing that PMN serine proteinases trigger a proteinase cascade that entails proMMP-2 activation: this gelatinase is the downstream effector of the proinvasive activity of PMN proteinases. These findings indicate a novel role for PMN-mediated inflammation in a variety of tissue remodeling processes including tumor invasion and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>11223341<newchar>SPARC is a multifunctional glycoprotein that belongs to the matricellular group of proteins. It modulates cellular interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM) by its binding to structural matrix proteins, such as collagen and vitronectin, and by its abrogation of focal adhesions, features contributing to a counteradhesive effect on cells. SPARC inhibits cellular proliferation by an arrest of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. It also regulates the activity of growth factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The expression of SPARC in adult animals is limited largely to remodeling tissue, such as bone, gut mucosa, and healing wounds, and it is prominent in tumors and in disorders associated with fibrosis. The crystal structure of two of the three domains of the protein has revealed a novel follistatin-like module and an extracellular calcium-binding (EC) module containing two EF-hand motifs. The follistatin-like module and the EC module are shared by at least four other proteins that comprise a family of SPARC-related genes. Targeted disruption of the SPARC locus in mice has shown that SPARC is important for lens transparency, as SPARC-null mice develop cataracts shortly after birth. SPARC is a prototypical matricellular protein that functions to regulate cell-matrix interactions and thereby influences many important physiological and pathological processes.<newchar><newabs>11473126<newchar>Heterodimeric integrin receptors for extracellular matrix (ECM) play vital roles in bidirectional signaling during tissue development, organization, remodeling, and repair. The beta integrin subunit cytoplasmic domain is essential for transmission of many of these signals and overexpression of an unpaired beta tail in cultured cells inhibits endogenous integrins. Unlike vertebrates, which have at least nine beta subunit genes, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans expresses only one beta subunit (betapat-3), and a null mutation in this gene causes embryonic lethality. To determine the functions of integrins during larval development and in adult tissues, we have taken a dominant negative approach by expression of an HA-betatail transgene composed of a hemagglutinin (HA) epitope tag extracellular domain connected to the betapat-3 transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. Expression of this transgene in muscle and gonad, major sites of integrin expression, caused a variety of phenotypes dependent on the level of transgene expression. Abnormalities in body wall and sex muscles led to uncoordinated movement and egg-laying defects. Significant anomalies in migration and pathfinding were caused by tissue-specific expression of HA-betatail in the distal tip cells (DTC), the cells that direct gonad morphogenesis. A pat-3 gene with Tyr to Phe mutations in the cytoplasmic domain was able to rescue pat-3 null animals but also showed DTC migration defects. These results show that betapat-3 plays important roles in post-embryonic organogenesis and tissue function.<newchar><newabs>11008212<newchar>Elastin is a major component of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the lamina cribrosa in the optic nerve head in humans and nonhuman primates. The lamina cribrosa appears to be the site of damage to the retinal ganglion cell axons in glaucomatous optic neuropathy, characterized in many patients by elevated intraocular pressure (IOP). Type 1B astrocytes are the major cell type in the lamina, synthesize elastic fibers during development, express increased elastin mRNA, and synthesize abnormal elastin in glaucoma. In this study, we determined the effect of elevated hydrostatic pressure on the synthesis of elastin by type 1B astrocytes in culture. Type 1B astrocytes were exposed to gradients of hydrostatic pressure and tested for proliferation, morphology, synthesis, and deposition of elastin. Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and immunoprecipitation of radiolabeled protein determined total new protein and elastin synthesis. Proteins from the conditioned media were analyzed by Western blot. Levels of elastin mRNA were determined by in situ hybridization. Cell proliferation increased approximately 2-fold after exposure to pressure for one day, approximately 5-fold after 3 and 5 days of exposure to pressure. Confocal and electron microscopic cytochemistry showed a marked increase in intracellular elastin in astrocytes exposed to pressure, as compared with controls. Intracellular elastin was associated with the RER-Golgi region and with the cytoskeleton. Total protein and elastin synthesis increased significantly (P &lt; 0.05) at 3- and 5-day exposure to pressure, as well as the level of elastin mRNA. Elastin protein in the media increased with the level of pressure. These results indicate that hydrostatic pressure stimulates type 1B astrocytes to synthesize and secrete soluble elastin into the media. In glaucoma, type 1B astrocytes may respond to IOP-related stress with increased expression of elastin and formation of elastotic fibers leading to loss of elasticity and tissue remodeling.<newchar><newabs>10567441<newchar>Tumor cells interact with stromal cells via soluble or cell-bound factors stimulating the production of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a group of enzymes largely involved in the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling in tumor invasion. Among these factors, extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN) has been shown to stimulate in vitro the fibroblast production of various MMPs such as interstitial collagenase (MMP-1), stromelysin-1 (MMP-3), and gelatinase A (MMP-2). In this study, the EMMPRIN protein was detected by immunohistochemistry prominently in malignant proliferations of the breast and the lung. It was present at the surface of both tumor epithelial and peritumor stromal cells. Because previous studies have reported that stromal cells do not express EMMPRIN mRNAs, it is very likely that EMMPRIN is bound to stromal cells via a specific receptor. Moreover, our observations also demonstrated that the same peritumor stromal cells strongly express MMP-2. Our results show that EMMPRIN is an important factor in tumor progression by causing tumor-associated stromal cells to increase their MMP-2 production, thus facilitating tumor invasion and neoangiogenesis. (J Histochem Cytochem 47: 1575-1580, 1999)<newchar><newabs>12382146<newchar>We have investigated the temporal maturation of the rat kidney during the postnatal developmental period. As a result, we observed the following: an active process of cortical cell proliferation and differentiation occurs as late as day 20. The medulla is the most immature zone at birth and displays the greatest morphological changes during this period. At birth, no distinction exists between inner and outer medulla, and the outer and inner strip of the outer medulla can be distinguished as late as day 30. Remodeling of the ECM surrounding collecting ducts occurs in the medulla twice, stopping at day 11 and it occurs in the papilla three times, stopping at day 20. The increase of kidney size is temporally different for each kidney zone. The cortex and the papilla acquire the morphological appearance of the adult kidney before the medulla does. Consequently, the medulla remains at the highest degree of immaturation among the kidney zones for a relatively long postnatal period.<newchar><newabs>11102747<newchar>SPARC is a multifunctional glycoprotein that belongs to the matricellular group of proteins. It modulates cellular interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM) by its binding to structural matrix proteins, such as collagen and vitronectin, and by its abrogation of focal adhesions, features contributing to a counteradhesive effect on cells. SPARC inhibits cellular proliferation by an arrest of cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. It also regulates the activity of growth factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The expression of SPARC in adult animals is limited largely to remodeling tissue, such as bone, gut mucosa, and healing wounds, and it is prominent in tumors and in disorders associated with fibrosis. The crystal structure of two of the three domains of the protein has revealed a novel follistatin-like module and an extracellular calcium-binding (EC) module containing two EF-hand motifs. The follistatin-like module and the EC module are shared by at least four other proteins that comprise a family of SPARC-related genes. Targeted disruption of the SPARC locus in mice has shown that SPARC is important for lens transparency, as SPARC-null mice develop cataracts shortly after birth. SPARC is a prototypical matricellular protein that functions to regulate cell-matrix interactions and thereby influences many important physiological and pathological processes.<newchar><newabs>10474160<newchar>One of the earliest events in limb regeneration is the extensive remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of matrix degrading enzymes that have been identified in both normal and disease states. Using RT-PCR and cDNA library screening, we have isolated sequences homologous to four different Mmp genes. The spatial and temporal expression of one of these, Mmp-9, has been analyzed during axolotl limb regeneration. Northern blot analysis identifies a 3.8 kb transcript that is abundantly expressed during regeneration, and whole-mount in situ hybridization has uncovered an unusual bi-phasic expression pattern. The first phase begins at 2 hours after amputation, and expression is confined to the healed wound epithelium. This phase continues for 2 days, showing peak expression at 14 hours after amputation. This early phase may be needed to retard reformation of the basal lamina of the epidermis, and thereby facilitate the epidermal-mesenchymal interactions required for successful regeneration. The second phase begins a few days later when a small blastema has formed. During this phase, expression is in the mesenchyme, localized to cells around the tips of the cut skeletal elements. This expression is maintained through several stages until redifferentiation begins. The timing and position of the second phase of expression is consistent with a role for Mmp-9 in the removal of damaged cartilage matrix. We have also discovered that the time of onset of Mmp-9 expression is sensitive to denervation, which causes a delay of several hours. Finally, retinoids, known for their dramatic effects on the pattern of regenerating limbs, can cause a down regulation of Mmp-9 expression. Dev Dyn 1999;216:2-9.<newchar><newabs>10860849<newchar>Scatter factor (SF) or hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) has been identified as an angiogenic factor. Angiogenesis requires not only tube formation but also invasion of pericytes and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling to promote new vessel stabilization. In the current study, the effect of SF/HGF on endothelial cell (EC) production of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) was explored. We showed that SF/HGF enhanced MT1-MMP synthesis and induced MMP-2 activation in two human EC lines: dermal microvessel EC and coronary arterial EC. Furthermore, SF/HGF accelerated EC invasion into matrix, an activity that could be inhibited by a MMP inhibitor. We also demonstrated that the MAP kinase cascade is critical in signal transduction pathway from SF/HGF stimulation to MT1-MMP up-regulation. The current study indicates that MMP activation is a novel effect of SF/HGF on ECs.<newchar><newabs>10641790<newchar>SPARC (Secreted ProteinAcidic and Rich in Cysteine) is a prototype of a family of biologically active glycoproteins that bind to cells and to extracellular matrix (ECM) components. It is expressed spatially and temporally during embryogenesis, tissue remodeling and repair. SPARC is a modular protein (34 kDa) comprised of three structural domains, one or more of which are implicated in the regulation of cell adhesion, proliferation, matrix synthesis/turnover. Rapid proteolysis of SPARC by extracellular proteases accounts for its transient detection in the extracellular environment. The proposed roles of SPARC in the development of cataracts and the regulation of angiogenesis during wound healing and tumor growth account for the recent attention it has received from the biomedical community.<newchar><newabs>10227385<newchar>The synthesis and regulation of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are important factors contributing to the involution of mammary gland. In order to understand the role of these MMPs in involution and in remodeling of the mammary gland, the different MMPs (130K, 68K, and 60K gelatinases) were partially purified by gel filtration and affinity chromatography over gelatin Sepharose and subjected to kinetic analysis. Comparative analysis of the different gelatinases showed that the 130K that appears at the early involuntary phase and the constitutive 68K enzyme are more specific for Col IV of the basement membrane, while the inducible 60K that appeared at the later phase of involution degraded Col I more efficiently. These neutral proteinases required Ca2+/Zn2+ for their activity and the analysis of cation dependence revealed that Ca2+ at 10 mM concentration and above completely inhibited the enzyme. The 60K was active at very low concentration of Zn2+ (5 microM); but at higher concentration of Zn2+ (2 mM), where the 68K and 130K were active, the 60K gelatinase was inhibited, indicating a difference in the cation dependence of these enzymes. Chondroitin sulfate A and chondroitin sulfate C caused inhibition of the 130K, 68K, and 60K, while hyaluronic acid and heparin did not show any effect, suggesting that the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan that decorates collagen in the ECM can modu late the activity of the collagenases in vivo. These results suggest that the 130K gelatinase expressed during the early phase of involution degraded Col IV of the basement membrane, making the 60K gelatinase formed at a later stage of involution more accessible to its preferred substrate (Col I of the underlying stroma), highlighting the role of these MMPs in mammary gland involution.<newchar><newabs>19469576<newchar>Collagen is an important marker for the assessment of tissue remodeling, both in normal tissue maturation and in a variety of prevalent disease processes. Given the importance of multivalency in the natural interactions of collagen, multivalent ligands provide unique opportunities to target collagen architectures. Here, we explored the use of micelles as dynamic self-assembling multivalent scaffolds for the collagen binding protein CNA35. Despite the increased popularity of micelles as nanosized carriers in targeted drug delivery and molecular imaging, few studies have actually directly addressed the importance of multivalent interactions for micelle-based targeting. Native chemical ligation was used as a chemoselective and efficient method to prepare relatively well-defined and stable micelles with a tunable average protein content between 0 and 20 copies of CNA35 per micelle. The thermodynamics and kinetics of CNA35 micelle binding to collagen was studied using solid-phase and surface plasmon resonance assays. Multivalent interactions between the micelles and collagen had a remarkable effect on micellar stability, since no dissociation of collagen-bound micelles was observed even after extensive washing. In addition, an impressive enhancement of collagen affinity was observed both in vitro and ex vivo resulting from multivalent display of a so-called &quot;nonbinding&quot; variant of CNA35. This &quot;restoration&quot; of collagen affinity was subsequently also observed for liposomes displaying the same low-affinity CNA35 variant at a sufficient density. These results demonstrate the importance of multivalent interactions for micelle-based targeting and illustrate the strength of multiple weak interactions when targeting intrinsically multivalent extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as collagen.<newchar><newabs>18292826<newchar>RCAS1 expression is related to the regulation of activated immune cells and to connective tissue remodeling within the endometrium. DFF45 seems to play an important role in the apoptotic process, most likely by acting through the regulation of DNA fragmentation. Its expression changes within the endometrium seem to be related to the resistance of endometrial cells to apoptosis. The aim of the present study was to evaluate RCAS1 and DFF45 endometrial expressions during ovulation and the implantation period. RCAS1 and DFF45 expression was assessed by the Western-blot method in endometrial tissue samples obtained from 20 patients. The tissue samples were classified according to the menstrual cycle phases in which they were collected, with a division into three phases: late proliferative, early secretory, and mid-secretory. The lowest level of RCAS1 and the highest level of DFF45 endometrial expression was found during the early secretory cycle phase. Statistically significantly higher RCAS1 and statistically significantly lower DFF45 endometrial expression was identified in the endometrium during the late proliferative as compared to the early secretory cycle phase. Moreover, statistically significantly higher RCAS1 and statistically significantly lower DFF45 expression was found in the endometrium during the mid-secretory as compared to the early secretory cycle phase. The preparation for implantation process in the endometrium is preceded by dynamic changes in endometrial ECM and results from the proper interaction between endometrial and immune cells. The course of this process is conditioned by the immunomodulating activity of endometrial cells and their resistance to immune-mediated apoptosis. These dynamic changes are closely related to RCAS1 and DFF45 expression alterations.<newchar><newabs>20641344<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion molecules consist of a complex network of fibronectins, collagens, chondroitins, laminins, glycoproteins, heparin sulfate, tenascins, and proteoglycans that surround connective tissue cells, and they are mainly secreted by fibroblasts, chondroblasts, and osteoblasts (1). Cell substrate adhesion molecules are considered essential regulators of cell migration, differentiation, and tissue integrity and remodeling. These molecules play a role in inflammation and atherogenesis, but they also participate in the process of invasion and metastasis of malignant cells in the host tissue (2). Fibrosis is the formation of excess fibrous connective tissue (mainly collagen type I) in an organ or tissue as a reparative or reactive process in many chronic diseases in the heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, or vasculature. Tumor angiogenesis represents a continuous and important process in tumor development in which the tumor attempts to gain an independent blood supply (3). This process is driven by the tumor's overproduction of angiogenic factors, which bind to receptors on nearby vessel endothelial cells. Angiogenesis is essential for the growth of solid tumors and their metastases. Imaging angiogenesis may be useful for monitoring angiogenic treatments of tumors and cardiovascular diseases (4-6). Aminopeptidase N (APN, CD13) is a membrane bound glycoprotein with MMP activity that cleaves unsubstituted, N-terminal amino acids with neutral side chains from peptides (7). APN has been shown to play a role in tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (8). In addition to endothelial cells of angiogenic vessels, most cells of myeloid origin, epithelial cells, fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells also express CD13 (9, 10). The tumor homing peptide cyclo(Cys-Asn-Gly-Arg-Cys)-Gly-Lys (cNGR) contains the Asn-Gly-Arg (NGR) motif that binds to APN (11). Buehler et al. (12) has conjugated cNGR with Oregon Green 488 (OG488) to study angiogenesis in a murine myocardial infarction model.<newchar><newabs>19280692<newchar>Collagen type V is highly expressed during tissue development and wound repair, but its exact function remains unclear. Cell binding to collagen V affects various basic cell functions and increased collagen V levels alter the structural organization and the stiffness of the ECM. We studied the combined effects of collagen V and substrate stiffness on the morphology, focal adhesion formation, and actin organization of fibroblasts. We found that a hybrid collagen I/V coating impairs fibroblast spreading on soft substrates (&lt;10 kPa), but not on stiffer substrates (68 kPa or glass). In sharp contrast, a pure collagen I coating does not impair cell spreading on soft substrates. The impairment of cell spreading by collagen V is accompanied by diffuse actin staining patterns and small focal adhesions. These observations suggest that collagen V plays an essential role in modifying cell behavior during development and remodeling, when very soft tissues are present.<newchar><newabs>20641204<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases localized at the cell surface or in extracellular compartments (1). MMPs degrade all components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and are associated with a variety of pathological conditions such as wound healing, tissue remodeling, tumor angiogenesis, and embryo development. The active site of MMPs contains a catalytic domain coordinated by zinc to recognize motifs with a consensus sequence of PXX↓XHy, where ↓ represents the cleavage point and XHy represents a large hydrophobic residue (2). Excess MMP activity has been observed in conjunction with many diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, autoimmune diseases, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer (3). For example, an overexpression of MMP subtype-2 (MMP-2 or gelatinase A), an enzyme that degrades type IV collagen and gelatin, is present in many human tumors (4). Thus, MMP has been an important therapeutic target for many years (5). Gadolinium (Gd)-labeled DOTA-G-NH(CH2)11CO-RSPAYYTAA-(CH2CH2O)8-R (GdPCA2) is a proteinase-modulated contrast agent (PCA) for in vivo imaging of MMP-2 with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (6). GdPCA2 consists of four components: a peptide substrate (RSPAY↓YTAA) specific for MMP-2, a Gd-DOTA complex as an MRI probe, an alkyl chain of 12-carbon as a hydrophilic linker between the N-terminus of the peptide and the MRI probe, and an eight-unit polyethylene glycol (PEG8) chain linked to the C-terminus of the peptide to enhance the solubility of GdPCA2. The cleavage of GdPCA2 by MMP-2 produces a less soluble Gd(3+)-labeled fragment. Thus, the Gd species acts as a solubility switch specific for the enzyme MMP-2. GdPCA2 may have different pharmacokinetics than its cleaved product, which can be used to evaluate MMP-2 activity via dynamic MRI measurement.<newchar><newabs>17890669<newchar>During bone growth, development, and remodeling, angiogenesis as well as osteogenesis are closely associated processes, sharing some essential mediators. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was initially recognized as the best-characterized endothelial-specific growth factor, which increased vascular permeability and angiogenesis, and it is now apparent that this cytokine regulates multiple biological functions in the endochondral ossification of mandibular condylar growth, as well as long bone formation. The complexity of VEGF biology is paralleled by the emerging complexity of interactions between VEGF ligands and their receptors. This narrative review summarizes the family of VEGF-related molecules, including 7 mammalian members, namely, VEGF, placenta growth factor (PLGF), and VEGF-B, -C, -D, -E, and -F. The biological functions of VEGF are mediated by at least 3 corresponding receptors: VEGFR-1/Flt-1, VEGFR-2/Flk-1, VEGFR-3/Flt-4 and 2 co-receptors of neuropilin (NRP) and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs). Current findings on endochondral ossification are also discussed, with emphasis on VEGF-A action in osteoblasts, chondroblasts, and chondroclasts/osteoclasts and regulatory mechanisms involving oxygen tension, and some growth factors and hormones. Furthermore, the therapeutic implications of recombinant VEGF-A protein therapy and VEGF-A gene therapy are evaluated. Abbreviations used: VEGF, Vascular endothelial growth factor; PLGF, placenta growth factor; NRP, neuropilin; HSPGs, heparan sulfate proteoglycans; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; TGF, transforming growth factor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; ECM, extracellular matrix; RTKs, receptor tyrosine kinases; ERK, extracellular signal kinases; HIF, hypoxia-inducible factor.<newchar><newabs>17455222<newchar>Collagenase-1 is a protease expressed by active fibroblasts that is involved in remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In this study, we characterize the intracellular signaling mechanism of collagenase-1 production by IL-1alpha in subcultured normal fibroblasts (NF) from uninjured normal corneas, compared to that in repair wound fibroblasts (WF). In NF, collagenase-1 was induced specifically after the exogenous addition of IL-1alpha via activation of ERK and p38MAPK. Collagenase-1 expression was strongly suppressed upon treatment with either a MEK or p38MAPK inhibitor. In contrast, repair WF constitutively synthesized both IL-1alpha and collagenase-1. Combined treatment with both mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors dramatically reduced collagenase-1 synthesis, while individual MEK1 or p38 inhibitors weakly modulated the collagenase-1 level. The results indicate that both pathways are crucial in the regulation of collagenase-1 synthesis. Furthermore, an IL-1alpha receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) could not abolish constitutive collagenase-1 synthesis, even at high doses, suggesting that other cytokines/factors are additionally involved in this process. We propose that induction of collagenase-1 by IL-1alpha in both WF and NF depends on a unique combination of cell type-specific signaling pathways.<newchar><newabs>18343155<newchar>The extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important regulator of angiogenesis and vascular remodeling. We showed previously that angiogenic capillaries in the developing CNS express high levels of fibronectin and its receptor alpha5beta1 integrin, and that this expression is developmentally downregulated. As cerebral hypoxia leads to an angiogenic response, we sought to determine whether angiogenic vessels in the adult CNS re-express fibronectin and the alpha5beta1 integrin. Ten-week old mice were subject to hypobaric hypoxia for 0, 4, 7 and 14 days, and fibronectin/integrin expression examined. Fibronectin and the alpha5 integrin subunit were strongly upregulated on capillaries in the hypoxic CNS, with the effect maximal at the earliest time point examined (4 days). Immunofluorescent studies demonstrated that the alpha5 integrin was expressed by angiogenic endothelial cells. In light of the defined angiogenic role for fibronectin in other systems, this work suggests that induction of fibronectin-alpha5beta1 integrin expression may be an important molecular switch driving angiogenesis in the hypoxic CNS.<newchar><newabs>17911432<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) as a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases have been involved in remodeling the extracellular matrix (ECM) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In RA patients synovial fluid and serum include enhanced levels of MMP-3. The 5A/6A polymorphism in the MMP-3 gene promoter can contribute to the severity of RA on account of a higher promoter activity of the 5A allele in vitro. The aim of the study was to associate the 5A/6A polymorphism of the MMP-3 gene with radiographic progression of RA. A total of 128 RA patients according to the ACR criteria were available for the study. Radiographs of both hands, obtained from all RA patients, were scored using the modified Sharp/van der Heijde method and the Steinbrocker method. The total Sharp score (TSS) and the annual radiographic progression rate (TSS/year) were calculated. Significant association with the 5A/6A polymorphism was found between patients with TSS/year &lt;or= 1.00 and those with TSS/year &gt; 1.00 in allelic frequencies (Pa = 0.046) and also in genotype distribution (Pg = 0.04). Compared to other genotypes the prevalence of 5A/5A genotype was lower within patients with TSS/year &lt;or= 1.00 (odds ratio [OR] = 0.2; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.04-0.85; P = 0.01). Also, in comparison to genotypes 5A/6A and 5A/5A, the prevalence of 6A/6A genotype was higher within patients with nonerosive RA (OR = 2.65; 95% CI 1.03-6.83, P = 0.02). Results obtained in this study provide the evidence of an association of the 5A/6A promoter polymorphism of the MMP-3 gene to the radiographic progression of RA.<newchar><newabs>18207447<newchar>Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating, lethal and currently untreatable lung disorder of unknown etiology. It is characterized by epithelial injury and activation, fibroblastic foci formation, and exaggerated accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) with the destruction of the lung parenchyma. Despite important progress in our understanding of the general mechanisms involved in lung fibrogenesis, the pathogenesis of the IPF remains unclear. Although the irreversible and progressive fibrosis in the lung suggests a decrease in lung degradative machinery, an increasing body of evidence, primarily obtained by global gene expression studies, demonstrates a significant upregulation of degrading enzymes in IPF. In this context, this review will focus on some families of the degradome, a term proposed for the complete set of proteases that are expressed at a specific time by a cell, tissue or an organism. In particular, we will approach recent progress in our understanding of the behavior of two families of metalloproteases M10 and M12 which are significantly changed in the IPF lungs. In general, evidence highlights the increasing diversity in both substrates and functions of these enzymes and the complexity of the processes in which they are involved, and indicate a critical role in the abnormal remodeling of IPF.<newchar><newabs>26110325<newchar>The restoration of structure, function, and physiology to damaged or missing tissue through the use of a regenerative tissue matrix (RTM) leads to regenerative healing rather than reparative scarring. While many processes exist to transform biologic materials into an extracellular matrix (ECM), only those that maintain the required structural and biochemical properties necessary to capture the intrinsic regenerative abilities of the body are suitable to produce an RTM. Histological examination using differential staining with hematoxylin and eosin stain or Verhoeff von Geisen stain of human biopsies of RTM obtained from 2 different abdominal surgery patients taken at 8- and 12 months were consistent with RTM remodeling into fascia-like tissue. A synopsis of recent studies on the use of the RTM GraftJacket® (Wright Medical Technologies, Memphis, Tenn) in successful closure of diabetic foot wounds is presented. Collectively, these reports indicate that LifeCell produced ECMs exemplified by GraftJacket exhibit the required clinical outcomes associated with an RTM.<newchar><newabs>17065156<newchar>Secreted lysosomal cysteine proteases (cathepsins) are involved in degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix, thus contributing to cell adhesion and migration. Among the eleven human lysosomal cysteine proteases, only procathepsin X contains an RGD motif located in a highly exposed region of the propeptide, which may allow binding of the proenzyme to RGD-recognizing integrins. Here, we have tested procathepsin X for cell-adhesive properties and found that it supports integrin alpha(v)beta(3)-dependent attachment and spreading of human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Using site-directed mutants of procathepsin X, we proved that this effect is mediated by the RGD sequence within the proregion of the protease. Endogenous procathepsin X is transported to the plasma membrane, accumulates in vesicles at lamellipodia of the human umbilical vein endothelial cell, and is partly associated with the cell surface, as shown by immunofluorescence. In addition, procathepsin X is partly co-localized with integrin beta(3), as detected by immunogold electron microscopy. A direct interaction between endogenous procathepsin X and alpha(v)beta(3) was demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Moreover, surface plasmon resonance analysis revealed significant and RGD-dependent binding of procathepsin X to integrin alpha(v)beta(3). Our results provide for the first time evidence that the extracellular function of cathepsin X may include binding to integrins thereby modulating the attachment of migrating cells to ECM components.<newchar><newabs>17340613<newchar>The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are multifunctional proteins that specifically inhibit matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and tissue remodeling. This is directed by forming tightly bound inhibitory complexes with MMPs. Recent years have revealed important differences of various biological activities between TIMP families but molecular mechanisms are not clear. To define the molecular mechanisms of TIMP-1-dependent biological processes, we used TIMP-1 as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, along with a human ovary cDNA library. Further characterization revealed the ninth zinc finger domain as an interacting domain of the promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF). Interaction of PLZF with TIMP-1 in mammalian cells was also confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and with in vitro binding assays. We investigated whether TIMP-1-mediated anti-apoptotic activity could promote the growth of ovarian cancer in an experimental model system. TIMP-1 treatment was found to be more effective at increasing ovarian cancer growth when compared with PLZF in parallel experiments. Subsequently, the efficacy of a combined treatment with TIMP-1 and PLZF was investigated. In the presence of both of these proteins, TIMP-1 significantly reduced apoptosis induced by PLZF in cervical carcinoma cells. These combined results indicate that TIMP-1 functions as an anti-activator of the transcriptional repressive activity of PLZF.<newchar><newabs>17161611<newchar>The hallmark of failing renal transplants is tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis. The cytokine connective tissue growth factor (CTGF or CCN2) plays an important role in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tubular epithelial cells (TECs). A unique domain within CTGF (IRTPKISKPIKFELSG) which binds to its potential receptor integrin alpha v beta3 has been identified. This study was carried out to further characterize a synthetic hexadeca-peptide (P2) homologous to this domain and to determine its effect on CTGF-mediated solid phase cell adhesion, EMT induction and fibrogenesis in rat renal NRK-52E cells. Results showed that both P2 and recombinant CTGF bound to NRK-52E cells. Unlike CTGF, P2 had little effect on EMT induction including cytoskeleton remodeling and expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) and E-cadherin, nor did it have effect on fibrogenic induction including alternation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, collagen type I and IV at gene and protein levels. All data showed that P2 bound preferably on the surface of NRK-52E cells and inhibited the effect of CTGF on EMT induction and cell fibrogenesis, probably by occupying the binding sites of CTGF within its potential receptors. Therefore, P2 may be used as a potential anti-fibrotic agent.<newchar><newabs>17332158<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a crucial role in growth-plate vascularization and ossification by processes involving proteolytic cleavage and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Their regulation in the growth plate is crucial for normal vs. impaired matrix assembly. Tibial dyschondroplasia (TD), a prevalent skeletal abnormality in avian species, is characterized by the formation of a nonvascularized, nonmineralized plaque in the growth plate. Here, we show differential regulation of MMPs in cultured chondrocytes from chickens and turkeys; retinoic acid (RA) elevated MMP-2 activity in both species, but only in chicken did it induce MMP-9 activity. In contrast, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) treatment induced MMP-9 activity in turkey chondrocytes but not in those of chicken. Moreover, we found different developmental patterns of TD in chickens and turkeys in-vivo as lower concentrations of, and shorter exposure to thiram were required in chicken than in turkey for TD induction. Growth-plate cartilage taken from thiram-induced lesions had lower gelatinolytic and caseinolytic activities compared with normal cartilage. Likewise, thiram reduced MMP-2 and MMP-13 activity in both chicken and turkey chondrocytes in vitro, although 10-fold higher concentrations were required for this effect in the latter. Finally, the combined treatments of RA or PMA with thiram induced MMP-9 activity in turkey but not in chicken chondrocytes. Furthermore, RA combined with thiram synergistically upregulated its activity in turkey but not chicken chondrocytes. Taken together, these results suggest that mechanisms of MMP regulation differ in the growth plates of these closely related avian species, resulting in altered matrix assembly as exemplified by TD development.<newchar><newabs>17559085<newchar>The transcriptional coactivator p300 is a ubiquitous nuclear phosphoprotein and transcriptional cofactor with intrinsic acetyltransferase activity. p300 controls the expression of numerous genes in cell-type and signal-specific manner, and plays a pivotal role in cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and embryogenesis. By catalyzing acetylation of histones and transcription factors, p300 plays a significant role in epigenetic regulation. Recent evidence suggests that abnormal p300 function is associated with deregulated target gene expression, and is implicated in inflammation, cancer, cardiac hypertrophy, and genetic disorders such as the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. The activity of p300 is regulated at multiple levels, including developmental stage-specific expression, post-translational modifications, subcellular localization, and cell-type and gene-specific interactions with transcription factors. Although p300 has been investigated extensively in epithelial and hematopoietic cells, its role in fibroblast biology and tissue repair has received little attention to date. Recent studies implicate p300 in the regulation of collagen synthesis by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Both the acetyltransferase activity of p300 and its inducible interaction with Smad3 are essential for mediating TGF-beta-induced stimulation of collagen synthesis. As a signal integrator whose availability for intracellular interactions with transcription factors is strictly limiting, p300 mediates the antagonistic regulation of TGF-beta-induced collagen synthesis by IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha via intracellular competition for limiting amount of p300. Significantly, p300 is itself a direct transcriptional target of TGF-beta in normal fibroblasts, and its levels are significantly elevated in fibrotic lesions as well as in experimental models of fibrosis. The emerging appreciation of the importance of p300 in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and fibrosis and novel insights concerning the regulation, mechanism of action, and significance of p300 in fibroblast biology are discussed in this minireview.<newchar><newabs>16609697<newchar>Proper extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, mediated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), is crucial for the development and survival of multicellular organisms. Full-length Xenopus laevis membrane type-3 matrix metallo proteinase (MT3-MMP) was amplified by PCR and cloned from a stage 28 Xenopus head cDNA library. A comparison of the derived Xenopus MT3-MMP protein sequence to that of other vertebrates revealed 86% identity with human and mouse and 85% identity with chicken. The expression profile of MT3-MMP was examined during Xenopus embryogenesis: MT3-MMP transcripts were first detected at the later stages of development and were localized to dorsal and anterior structures. During metamorphosis and in the adult frog, MT3-MMP expression was restricted to specific tissues and organs. Treatment of Xenopus embryos with lithium chloride (LiCl), ultraviolet irradiation (UV), or retinoic acid (RA) revealed that MT3-MMP levels increased with LiCl-dorsalizing treatments and decreased with UV-ventralizing and RA-anterior neural truncating treatments. Overexpression of MT3-MMP through RNA injections led to dose-dependent developmental abnormalities and death. Moreover, MT3-MMP overexpression resulted in neural and head structure abnormalities, as well as truncated axes. Taken together, these results indicate that MT3-MMP expression in Xenopus is spatially and temporally restricted. Furthermore, deregulation of MT3-MMP during early embryogenesis has detrimental effects on development.<newchar><newabs>16389945<newchar>Angiogenesis, the process by which new branches sprout from existing vessels, requires the degradation of the vascular basement membrane and remodeling of the ECM in order to allow endothelial cells to migrate and invade into the surrounding tissues. Serine, metallo, and cysteine proteinases are 3 types of a family of enzymes that proteolytically degrade various components of extracellular matrix. These proteases release various growth factors and also increase adhesive molecules and signaling pathway molecules upon their activation, which plays a significant role in angiogenesis. Downregulation of these molecules by antisense/siRNA or synthetic inhibitors decreases the levels of these molecules, inhibits the release of growth factors, and decreases the levels of various signaling pathway molecules, thereby leading to the inhibition of angiogenesis. Furthermore, MMPs degrade specific substrates and release angiogenic inhibitors which inhibit angiogenesis. Downregulation of 2 molecules, such as uPA and uPAR, uPAR and MMP-9, or Cathepsin B and MMP-9, are more effective to inhibit angiogenesis rather than downregulation of single molecules. However, careful testing of these combinations are most important because multiple effects of these combinations play a significant role in angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>15992798<newchar>In injured tissues, the fibrin-fibronectin (FN) provisional matrix provides a framework for cell adhesion, migration, and repair. Effective repair and remodeling require a proper balance between extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, contraction, and turnover. We utilized a three-dimensional (3D) fibrin-FN provisional matrix model to determine the contributions of the FN-binding integrin receptors alpha5beta1 and alpha4beta1 to matrix contraction. CHOalpha5 cells expressing alpha5beta1, a receptor for FN's RGD cell-binding domain, were highly contractile, and cells were well spread on a 3D fibrin-FN matrix. In contrast, CHOalpha4 cells expressing the alpha4beta1 receptor for FN's alternatively spliced V region attached less efficiently to FN and were deficient in fibrin-FN matrix contraction. Surprisingly, cell adhesion and matrix contraction by CHOalpha4 cells were dramatically enhanced, to levels equivalent to CHOalpha5 cells, when proteolyzed FN was used in place of intact FN in the fibrin-FN matrix. Similar enhancement was observed when ligand binding by alpha4beta1 integrins was activated by treatment with Mn(++), but not by stimulation of actin organization with LPA. Therefore, alpha4beta1-dependent cell responses to the provisional matrix are modulated by cleavage of matrix components.<newchar><newabs>15985535<newchar>The purpose of this study is to identify novel proteins released by cancer cells that are involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling using small-volume samples and automated technology. We applied multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT), which incorporates two-dimensional capillary chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to small quantities of serum-free supernatants of resting or phorbol ester-activated Suit-2 pancreatic cancer cells. Selected markers were validated in additional pancreatic cancer cell lines, primary cancers, and xenografted cancer cells. MudPIT analysis of 10 microl of supernatants identified 46 proteins, 21 of which are classified as secreted, and 10 have never been associated with pancreatic cancer. These include CSPG2/versican, Mac25/angiomodulin, IGFBP-1, HSPG2/perlecan, syndecan 4, FAM3C, APLP2, cyclophilin B, beta2 microglobulin, and ICA69. Evidence that cancer cells release these proteins in vivo was obtained for CSPG2/versican and Mac25/angiomodulin by immunohistochemistry on both primary pancreatic cancers and in a model consisting of Suit-2 cells embedded in an amorphous matrix and implanted in athymic mice. MudPIT allowed efficient and rapid identification of proteins released by cancer cells, including molecules previously undescribed in the type of cancer analyzed. Our finding that pancreatic cancer cells secrete a series of proteoglycans, including versican, perlecan, syndecan 1 and 4, challenges the common view that fibroblasts of tumor stroma are the sole source of these molecules.<newchar><newabs>16780951<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is a secreted type IV collagenase that plays an important role in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the migration of normal and tumor cells. We have shown that CpG-ODN-induced migration of RAW 264.7 cell is regulated by MMP-9 activity by using tissue inhibitors of MMP-1 (TIMP-1). The MMP-9 gene expression was transcriptionally induced by CpG-ODN in a time-dependent manner. An MMP-9 promoter-reporter was activated by the stimulation of CpG-ODN and ectopical expression of NF-kappaB transcription factor. Inhibition of NF-kappaB nuclear localization by co-expression of a mutant IkappaBalpha protein blocked the CpG-ODN-induced MMP-9 promoter activation. BMS-345541, an IKK-2 inhibitor also inhibited the expression of MMP-9 gene induced by CpG-ODN. Direct binding of NF-kappaB protein to the promoter region of the MMP-9 was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation using NF-kappaB antibody. These results lead us to a conclusion that NF-kappaB activation is required for MMP-9 gene expression. In summary, our data suggest that NF-kappaB-dependent expression of MMP-9 in response to CpG-ODN plays an important role in the recruitment of immune cells.<newchar><newabs>15898116<newchar>By microarray analyses, we identified two genes (BmADAMTS-1 and BmADAMTS-like) encoding a protein, which are induced during the pupal ecdysis in the wing discs of Bombyx mori; these genes are homologous to ADAMTS family members (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain, with thrombospondin type-1 repeats). A complete metal-binding motif of the ADAM-type metalloprotease domain (HEXXHXXGXXHD) was contained in both amino acid sequences. However, thrombospondin type 1 (TSP-1) repeats were observed only in BmADAMTS-1. The BmADAMTS-1 gene was expressed in the hemocyte and midgut of the larvae at day 2 of wandering stage (W2), and strongly induced during the pupal ecdysis in the hemolymph. The BmADAMTS-like gene was expressed in the epithelial tissues of the larvae at W2, and had expression peaks slightly later than the BmADAMTS-1 gene. Our results indicate that BmADAMTS-1 and BmADAMTS-like may cleave the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the degenerating and remodeling tissues during the molting periods.<newchar><newabs>15781320<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc endopeptidases that process growth factors, growth factor binding proteins, cell surface proteins, degrade extracellular matrix (ECM) components and thereby play a central role in tissue remodeling and tumor progression. Membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs) are a recently discovered subgroup of intrinsic plasma membrane proteins. Their functions have been extended from pericellular proteolysis and control of cell migration to cell signaling, control of cell proliferation and regulation of multiple stages of tumor progression including growth and angiogenesis. This review sheds light on the new functions of MT-MMPs and their inhibitors in tumor development and angiogenesis, and presents recent investigations that document their influence on various cell functions.<newchar><newabs>16961275<newchar>To investigate the effects of TGF-beta1 on the two gelatinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9), and their roles in lung remodeling after irradiation-induced lung injury. Expressions of TGF-beta1 were measured with western blot, and expressions of MMP-2 and MMP-9 were analyzed with zymography in a -TGF-beta1 transgenic mouse model after thoracic irradiation with 12 Gy. We found expressions of TGF-beta1 in the lung from the transgenic mice were three folds as compared to those from control mice. With densitometrical analysis, we found a significant decrease in MMP-9 activity in lung homogenates from the transgenic mice as compared with those from non-transgenic control mice 8 weeks after sham-irradiation (relative MMP-9 activity: C: 1.000 0.1091; TG: 0.4772 +/- 0.470 (n = 8, P &lt; 0.05). But MMP-2 was constitutively expressed in the lung homogenates from the transgenic mice as compared to those from control mice 8 weeks after sham-irradiation (relative MMP-2 activity 8 weeks after sham-irradiation: C: 1.000 +/- 0.1556, TG: 1.0075 +/- 0.1472). Eight weeks after thoracic irradiation with 12 Gy, we observed a significant increase of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity in lung homogenates from both transgenic and normal mice. In TGF-beta1 transgenic mice relative MMP-9 activity was increased to 1.5321 +/- 0.2217 folds 8 weeks after thoracic irradiation with 12 Gy as compared to those after sham-irradiation (1.000 +/- 0.2153), and relative MMP-2 activity was increased to 1.7142 +/- 0.4231 folds. Our results show that TGF-beta1 itself down-regulates activity of MMP-9, thereby decreases ECM degradation in lungs of TGF-beta1 transgenic mice. Also we find that ionizing irradiation upregulates both MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity. Over-expressions of MMP-9 and MMP-2 after lung irradiation are involved in the inflammatory response associated with radiation-induced lung injury, and maybe further in radiation-induced lung fibrosis.<newchar><newabs>15646039<newchar>A delicate balance between synthesis and degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is an essential feature of tissue remodeling. We have recently demonstrated that keratinocyte releasable stratifin, also known as 14-3-3 sigma protein, plays a critical role in modulating collagenase (MMP-1) mRNA expression in human dermal fibroblasts. In this study, we further characterized the collagenase stimulatory effect of stratifin in dermal fibroblasts and evaluated its effect in the presence and absence of insulin. Our data indicate that stratifin increases the expression of collagenase mRNA more than 20-fold in dermal fibroblasts, grown in either Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) plus 2% or 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Collagenase stimulatory effect of stratifin was completely blocked, when fibroblasts were cultured in test medium consisting of 50% keratinocyte serum-free medium (KSFM) and 50% DMEM. The collagenase suppressive effect of test medium was directly proportional to the volume of KSFM used. As this medium contained insulin, we then evaluated the collagenase stimulatory effect of stratifin in dermal fibroblasts in the presence and absence of insulin. The results revealed that stratifin significantly increased the expression of collagenase mRNA/18S (*p &lt; 0.05, n = 3) ratio, while insulin significantly decreased the expression of collagenase mRNA/18S (*p &lt; 0.05, n = 3) ratio. The insulin inhibitory effect on collagenase mRNA expression was time and dose dependent. The maximal inhibitory effect of insulin was seen at 36 h post treatment. In conclusion, stratifin stimulates the expression of collagenase mRNA expression in dermal fibroblasts and this effect is suppressed by insulin treatment.<newchar><newabs>15769679<newchar>Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) play important roles in the regulation of vascular functions. Loss of endothelial integrity can lead to vascular diseases such as stenosis resulting from atherosclerosis. The migration of ECs into wounded area in the vessel wall is required for the restoration of its integrity and functions. EC migration results from a balance of externally applied forces (e.g. shear stress), intracellular forces (e.g., those generated by contractile and cytoskeletal proteins), adhesion force between ECs and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and the force of EC-EC coupling through junction proteins. Shear stress modulates EC migration through the regulation of multiple signaling pathways, gene expression, and the reorganization of cytoskeleton, focal adhesion sites, and cell junctions. Investigations of EC migration under shearing can provide valuable knowledge on vascular remodeling process under physiological and pathological conditions.<newchar><newabs>15655343<newchar>We have developed a model system of late stage metastatic progression by isolating a highly malignant variant of human breast cancer cells from the parental MDA-MB-435 cell line. These cells, isolated from early lung metastasis, displayed increased anchorage independent growth in vitro and when transplanted ortho-topically into nude mice showed accelerated tumor growth rate and early lung spontaneous metastasis when compared to its parental counterpart. These cells, designated as MDA-MB-435-F-L, also showed intense wide spread early skeletal metastasis in vertebrae, mandible, femur, tibia and skull as detected by fluorescence imaging in an experimental bone metastasis model. Gene expression profiles from cDNA microarray showed up or downregulation of the expression of several significant genes regulating angiogenesis, apoptosis, ECM remodeling and metastasis in the MDA-MB-435-F-L cells in comparison to the parental cells. Among the up or downregulated genes, some have also been implicated in the survival of breast cancer patients. As such, the candidate genes selected in this breast cancer progression model system may serve as biomarkers of metastatic progression and also as potential tumor targets for breast cancer therapy.<newchar><newabs>15633240<newchar>High blood pressure (hypertension) is implicated in the development of atherosclerosis. Blood vessels are constantly subjected to stretch due to blood pressure and changes in stretch usually instigate adaptive vascular remodeling, including abnormal growth and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) as well as extracellular matrix (ECM). In this experiment, we used bovine aortic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells (EC-SMC) co-cultured ePTFE vascular grafts subjected to normal atmospheric pressure (as a control), and 100 mmHg hydrostatic pressure for 7 d. The increase of cell layer thickness was observed. When measured, the cell layer thickness increased by 116.2%. The increase of collagen (Type IV) synthesis was also observed in the immunohistochemistry assay. When stained with toluidine blue, the cells showed metachromatic phenomenon.<newchar><newabs>15914537<newchar>Wound repair requires both the recruitment and coordination of numerous cell types including inflammatory cells, fibroblasts, endothelial and epithelial cells. Each cell type has a distinct set of cell behavior such as formation of granulation tissue and basement membrane, migration, proliferation and redifferentiation. These processes are dependent on cell-cell and cell-ECM signaling, intracellular signal transduction cascades, and ultimately, changes in gene transcription. We have investigated the role of the transcription factor HOXA3 in wound repair and angiogenesis. Here we show that HOXA3 increases endothelial cell migration, induces angiogenesis in vivo, and leads to increased expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-14 (MMP-14) and urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) genes in endothelial cells in culture and in vivo in response to injury. We find that HOXA3 gene expression is upregulated during wound healing in angiogenic endothelial cells and keratinocytes, and that HOXA3 is not induced in genetically diabetic mice that have impaired angiogenesis and wound repair. We demonstrate that gene transfer of HOXA3 into diabetic mouse wounds leads to dramatic improvements in both angiogenesis and wound closure. In addition, we show that HOXA3 promotes migration of endothelial cells and keratinocytes in a uPAR-dependent manner. Together these findings illustrate how the morphoregulatory protein, HOXA3 can facilitate tissue remodeling via coordinated changes in both epithelial and endothelial cell gene expression and behavior in adult tissues during wound repair.<newchar><newabs>15353300<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) have been postulated to play a critical role in the extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling associated with follicular development. The gelatinases were localized to the theca of developing follicles and in the stroma of the rodent ovary. Gelatinolytic activity corresponded with the localization of MMP-2 and MMP-9 around the developing follicles and at the apex of preovulatory follicles. The TIMPs-1, -2, and -3 were localized to the stroma and theca of developing follicles and correlation between MMPs and the quality of the developing follicles was found. During the process of ovulation, MMP-1 protein was found in the theca interna and externa, interstitial glands, and germinal epithelium. Synthetic inhibitor of mammalian tissue collagenases was documented to be inhibitory to ovulation in perfused rat ovaries. MMP-19 and TIMP-1 messenger RNA were localized to the granulosa and thecal-interstitial cells of large preovulatory and ovulating follicles. Both were induced and upregulated 5-10 fold by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). MMP-2 mRNA found in theca-interstitial cells and membrane-type (MT) 1-MMP mRNA found in granulosa and theca-interstitial cells were both induced after stimulation with pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin (PMSG). Gelatinolytic activity was observed throughout the formation of the corpus luteum. At 12 h after hCG, luteinizing granulosa cells expressed TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 mRNA. In the newly forming corpus luteum at 24 h after hCG administration, the luteal cells expressed TIMP-1, -2, and -3 mRNA with unique pattern of cellular expression for each of the TIMPs. Regression of the corpus luteum is associated with a significant increase in the activity of the metalloproteinases. In luteinized granulosa cells from women with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) the MMP-TIMP balance is shifted towards greater MMP activity. Cultured luteinized granulosa cells obtained from PCOS patients secrete higher levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2 compared to granulosa cells from normal ovulatory patients whereas the secreted basal level of TIMP-1 was similar in both types of granulosa cells. These results indicate a higher net gelatinolytic activity within the luteinizing granulosa cells of patients with PCOS. It has been shown that in sheep, diversion of normal follicles to atresia by hypophysectomy is followed by a significant increase of intrafollicular levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 and the disappearance of connexin-43. It is therefore reasonable to speculate that MMP-9 and MMP-2 may be associated with inappropriate atresia in PCOS.<newchar><newabs>15453834<newchar>The recovery of skin function is the goal of each burn surgeon. Split-skin graft treatment of full-thickness skin defects leads to scar formation, which is often vulnerable and instable. Therefore, the aim of this study was to analyze wound healing and scar tissue formation in acute full-thickness wounds treated with clinically available biopolymer dermal regeneration templates. Full-thickness wounds (3 x 3 cm) on both flanks of Gottingen mini pigs (n= 3) were treated with split-thickness skin graft alone or in combination with a 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (EDC) cross-linked-collagen scaffold, Integra, or a polyethyleneglycol terephthalate-polybutylene terephthalate (PEGT/PBT) scaffold. The wounds (n= 12 per group) were examined weekly for six weeks to evaluate graft take, contraction (planimetry), and cosmetic appearance. Histologic samples taken after one and six weeks were used to assess scaffold angiogenesis, biocompatibility, and scar tissue quality. In all wounds, one week postwounding graft take was between 93 and 100 percent. The control wound, treated with split-skin graft, showed little granulation tissue formation, whereas the EDC-collagen treated wounds showed two to three times more granulation tissue formation. The collagen scaffold was completely degraded within one week. The Integra and PEGT/PBT scaffolds showed angiogenesis only through two-thirds of the scaffold, which resulted in loss of integrity of the epidermis. Only basal cells survived, proliferated, and regenerated a fully differentiated epidermis within three weeks. Granulation thickness was comparable to collagen scaffold-treated wounds. After six weeks, control wounds showed a wound contraction of 27.2 +/- 6.1 percent, Integra-treated wounds 34.6 +/- 6.4 percent, collagen scaffold-treated wounds 38.1 +/- 5.0 percent, and PEGT/PBT scaffold-treated wounds 54.5 +/- 3.9 percent. The latter wounds had significantly more contraction than wounds of other treatment groups. Microscopically, the control and collagen scaffold-treated wounds showed an immature scar tissue that was two times thicker in the EDC-collagen treated wounds. The Integra-treated wounds showed nondegraded collagen scaffold fibers with partly de novo dermal tissue formation and partly areas with giant cells and other inflammatory cells. The PEGT/PBT scaffold was almost completely degraded. Scaffold particles were phagocytosized and degraded intracellularly by clusters of macrophages. The scar tissue was in the early phase of ECM remodeling. In conclusion, this study showed that the rate of dermal tissue formation and scarring is influenced by the rate of scaffold angiogenesis, degradation, and host response induced by the scaffold materials.<newchar><newabs>15698866<newchar>Allylamine, a selective cardiovascular toxin that induces oxidative stress, is known to alter expression of extracellular matrix and cell adhesion proteins that are central to arterial remodeling. Our goals were to determine whether AAM treatment in rats modulates integrin/matrix-dependent arteriolar function, and to what extent integrin expression correlated to these alterations. Integrins are transmembrane proteins that facilitate mechanical and molecular signaling between the extracellular matrix and cytoskeleton, and so are suitable candidates for involvement in phenotypic and functional alterations of smooth muscle in response to oxidative stress. Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) and Leu-Asp-Val (LDV), two integrin-binding motifs found in ECM proteins such as collagens and fibronectin, are known to interact with integrins alphavbeta3 and alpha4beta1, respectively. Previously, we found that RGD containing peptides induce vasodilation through alphavbeta3, while LDV containing peptides induce vasoconstriction through alpha4beta1 of normal rat cremasteric arterioles. In allylamine-treated rats (AAM), the vasomotor response to LDV, but not RGD, was attenuated in a dose-dependent manner. To determine whether changes in integrin subunit mRNA levels correlated with these functional changes, we performed reverse transcription and Real-time PCR for alpha4 and beta3 integrin subunits on RNA isolated from single, first-order cremasteric arterioles. AAM treatment caused a dose-dependent decrease in alpha4 mRNA expression, but not beta3 mRNA expression, suggesting that the changes in vasomotor activity to LDV peptides may be attributable in part to reduced alpha4 expression upon exposure to AAM. These data are supported by similar decreases in alpha4integrin cell surface protein expression in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells treated either in vivo and in vitro with AAM.<newchar><newabs>15275818<newchar>Bladder wall replacement remains a challenging problem for urological surgery due to leakage, infection, stone formation, and extensive time needed for tissue regeneration. To explore the feasibility of producing a more functional biomaterial for bladder reconstitution, we incorporated muscle-derived cells (MDC) into small intestinal submucosa (SIS) scaffolds. MDC were harvested from mice hindleg muscle, transfected with a plasmid encoding for beta-galactosidase, and placed into single-layer SIS cell culture inserts. Twenty-five MDC and/or SIS specimens were incubated at 37 degrees C for either 10 or 20 days. After harvesting, mechanical properties were characterized using biaxial testing, and the areal strain under 1 MPa peak stress used to quantify tissue compliance. Histological results indicated that MDC migrated throughout the SIS after 20 days. The mean (+/-SE) areal strain of the 0 day control group was 0.182 +/- 0.027 (n=5). After 10 days incubation, the mean (+/-SE) areal strain in MDC/SIS was 0.247 +/- 0.014 (n=5) compared to 10 day control SIS 0.200 +/- 0.024 (n=6). After 20 days incubation, the mean areal strain of MDC/SIS was 0.255 +/- 0.019 (n=5) compared to control SIS 0.170 +/- 0.025 (n=5). Both 10 and 20 days seeded groups were significantly different (p=0.027) than that of incubated SIS alone, but were not different from each other. These results suggest that MDC growth was supported by SIS and that initial remodeling of the SIS ECM had occurred within the first 10 days of incubation, but may have slowed once the MDC had grown to confluence within the SIS.<newchar><newabs>15224401<newchar>Members of the family of large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), such as versican and aggrecan, are involved in early heart development, and in the development and progression of atherosclerosis and restenosis. Given the important roles played by versican and aggrecan in such processes, we sought to determine whether these molecules are present in the aortic wall during the advanced stages of chicken embryo development and the endothelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). Immunolabeling of serial cryosections revealed versican immunoreactivity around the cells within the intimal thickening, and the cells organized in lamellar and interlamellar cell layers. In contrast, a weak aggrecan immunoreactivity was limited to the cells arranged into lamellar and interlamellar cell layers. Immunolabeling also demonstrated that V2 is the main versican isoform present at the intimal thickening. According to immunoblotting analysis, the aggrecan content was very low in all stages examined, and two versican isoforms (V0 and V2) were present at day 14 of development. We also investigated whether versican isoforms were present during EMT in vitro. Versican immunoreactivity was detected in patches of endothelial cells; in the detaching and migrating cells, and the extracellular matrix (ECM) deposited by them; and in cells that had acquired mesenchymal characteristics. These data indicate that versican and aggrecan have different spatial and temporal patterns of expression, and they have different functions during remodeling of the aortic wall. Also, the different immunoreactivity and immunolocalization patterns observed for versican both in vivo and in vitro, in addition to being associated with the presence of different versican isoforms, may be related to the predominance of the V2 isoform during intimal thickening formation and EMT.<newchar><newabs>15326086<newchar>Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a ubiquitous growth-regulating protein with an essential role in tissue repair and formation of extracellular matrix (ECM). To better understand the role of different isoforms of TGF-beta in the cardiac remodeling process induced by norepinephrine (NE), the expression of TGF-beta1, TGF-beta2, and TGF-beta3 was studied and compared with the expression of collagen. NE (0.1 mg/kg. h) was intravenously infused in female and male Sprague-Dawley rats for several time periods, and freshly obtained ventricular myocardium after 1 day was dissociated into myocyte and nonmyocyte fractions. Prazosin (0.1 mg/kg x h) and metoprolol (1 mg/kg. h) were used to block alpha- and beta-adrenoceptors, respectively. After NE infusion, the three isoforms of TGF-beta were differentially induced as far as the magnitude and the time course is concerned. The increased expression of TGF-beta2 started earlier with a maximum after 12 hours and was more pronounced (10-fold elevation) than that of the other two isoforms, with a clear specificity for the left ventricle in female hearts. This specificity was also seen in male rats with 16-fold elevation of TGF-beta2 after 1 day of NE-stimulation. The increase of TGF-beta2 was significant only in the myocyte fraction obtained from female as well as from male hearts. The expression of the mRNA of all TGF-beta isoforms of collagen type I and type III, and of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and its inhibitor TIMP-2 was reduced predominantly by alpha-adrenoceptor blockade with prazosin. The increase in TGF-beta isoforms correlated with that of the mRNA expression of collagens, MMP-2 and TIMP-2.<newchar><newabs>15175558<newchar>Degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins plays an important role in the development of vascular remodeling. We investigated the alteration of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) on the development of neointima formation and the effect of a newly synthesized MMP inhibitor using hypercholesterolemic hamsters. Endothelial injury was achieved by a catheter in the hamster carotid artery. Two weeks after the injury, neointima was detected in all hamsters. Oral administration (twice a day) of ONO-4817 was started 2 hours before injury and continued for the next 2 weeks. The neointimal area, with appearance of maze-like structures, was markedly reduced by 52.4 +/- 8.4% by treatment with ONO-4817 at a dose of 20 mg/kg per day. The treatment by ONO-4817 (20 mg/kg per day) significantly reduced the indexes of histone H1 on day 1, 5, and 10 and the BrdU index of intimal smooth muscle cells on day 5 and 10, but not on day 1. Whereas DNA synthesis was not reduced by ONO-4817, in vitro SMC migration on the other hand was reduced dose dependently. According to the results of western-blotting analysis, the expressions of MMPs were increased 1 week after injury. Especially, MMP-12 was not detected in hamsters without cholesterol diet, but it was much increased after injury in hypercholesterolemic hamsters. Additionally, active form of MMP-12 increased in the injured artery of hypercholesterolemic hamsters. In conclusion, inhibition of MMPs results in the suppression of neointima following vascular injury via both prevention of SMC migration and SMC proliferation of late phase in hypercholesterolemic hamsters. MMP-12 plays an important role on vascular stenosis in hypercholesterolemia and ONO-4817 could be a useful compound for the therapy for this field.<newchar><newabs>15150281<newchar>SPARC (osteonectin, BM-40) is a matricellular glycoprotein that is expressed in many embryogenic and adult tissues undergoing remodeling or repair. SPARC modulates cellular interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM), inhibits cell adhesion and proliferation, and regulates growth factor activity. To explore further the function and activity of this protein in tissue homeostasis, we have developed several monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) that recognize distinct epitopes on SPARC. The MAbs bind to SPARC with high affinity and identify SPARC by ELISA, Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, immunocytochemistry, and/or immunohistochemistry. The MAbs were also characterized in functional assays for potential alteration of SPARC activity. SPARC binds to collagen I and laminin-1 through an epitope defined by MAb 293; this epitope is not involved in the binding of SPARC to collagen III. The other MAbs did not interfere with the binding of SPARC to collagen I or III or laminin-1. Inhibition of the anti-adhesive effect of SPARC on endothelial cells by MAb 236 was also observed. Functional analysis of SPARC in the presence of these novel MAbs now confirms that the activities ascribed to this matricellular protein can be assigned to discrete subdomains.<newchar><newabs>15572151<newchar>Tissue morphogenesis during development is regulated by growth factors and cytokines, and is characterized by constant remodeling of extracellular matrix (ECM) in response to signaling molecules, for example, growth factors, cytokines, and so forth. Proteoglycans that bind growth factors are potential regulators of tissue morphogenesis during embryonic development. In this study, we showed that transgenic mice overexpressing biglycan under the keratocan promoter exhibited exposure keratitis and premature eye opening from noninfectious eyelid ulceration due to perturbation of eyelid muscle formation and the failure of meibomian gland formation. In addition, in vitro analysis revealed that biglycan binds to TGF-alpha, thus interrupting EGFR signaling pathways essential for mesenchymal cell migration induced by eyelid epithelium. The defects of TGF-alpha signaling by excess biglycan were further augmented by the interruption of the autocrine or paracrine loop of the EGFR signaling pathway of HB-EGF expression elicited by TGF-alpha. These results are consistent with the notion that under physiological conditions, biglycan secreted by mesenchymal cells serves as a regulatory molecule for the formation of a TGF-alpha gradient serving as a morphogen of eyelid morphogenesis.<newchar><newabs>14678645<newchar>Integrins are one class of cell surface receptors that have been implicated in the regulation of a diverse set of cellular processes, including cell adhesion, migration, and invasion as well as gene expression, differentiation, and signal transduction. Cellular invasion not only requires the adhesive properties of integrins but also the proteolytic properties of matrix-degrading enzymes, such as the metalloproteinases (MMPs). Previous studies have shown that integrin alphavbeta3 is a receptor for MMP2, localizing its proteinase activity to the cell surface, ultimately leading to site-specific extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation. Here we develop reagents to investigate the possibility of an interplay between MMP9 and integrin alpha5beta1. With the use of EV22 viral studies, the tetrapeptide sequence, LRSG, was shown to be a dimerizing sequence mediating beta1 integrin binding to EV22. The same study also showed that cellular infection could be halted with the use of LRSG-containing peptides. In a later study, in an effort to isolate inhibitors of the MMP family, LRSG sequence was identified as one capable of binding MMP9. Interestingly, MMP9 contains an LRSG sequence, raising the possibility that MMP9 binds the cell surface via beta1 integrins through the dimerizing LRSG motif. We used the LRSG-containing sequence from beta1 integrins as an antigen to generate the monoclonal antibody (MAB) FM155 in the mouse model. MAB FM155 will help identify a cryptic epitope, LRSG, and its role in matrix remodeling as well as tumor growth, cancer cell migration, and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>12742660<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteases involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, leukocyte infiltration into lesions and myelin degradation in the central nervous system (CNS) disease multiple sclerosis (MS). We have investigated whether MMP-12 (macrophage metalloelastase) is expressed in MS lesions at various stages. In control patient tissue and (p)reactive MS lesions, only occasional microglial and astrocyte staining was detected. In contrast, in active demyelinating lesions, phagocytic macrophages were MMP-12 positive. A lower proportion of phagocytes was positive for MMP-12 in chronic active demyelinating lesions and inactive lesions. This suggests a role for MMP-12 during demyelination in MS.<newchar><newabs>14667976<newchar>Cervical softening is crucial for a normal parturition and corresponds to remodeling of the dominating cervical extra cellular matrix (ECM). The onset of labor as well as cervical ripening is under hormonal control. To get further information about the endocrine regulation of term cervical ripening the following study was undertaken: cervical biopsies were obtained vaginally at elective caesareans, after normal vaginal delivery and after PGE2 or antiprogestin RU486. Biopsies from non-pregnant women served as controls. The concentrations of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) protein were quantitated by EIA and the mRNA levels by solution hybridization. The ERalpha and beta were localized by immunohistochemistry, identified by RT-PCR and quantitated by solution hybridization. The co-localizations of CD45 (leukocyte antigen) and CD68 (macrophage antigen) were studied by immunohistochemistry. The cervical concentrations of ER and PR proteins decreased at term to 15 and 25%, respectively, compared to the non-pregnant levels. A further decrease was measured in the maximal ripened cervix at parturition. The mRNA levels were unchanged but IGF-I mRNA reached a maximum at term. ERalpha mRNA was significantly decreased until delivery, whereas ERbeta mRNA, like IGF-I; was maximum at term. By immunostaining ERbeta could be co-localized with CD45 leukocyte antigen and CD68 macrophage specific antigen. Oral administration of RU486 induced a significant increase in ER protein concentration, whereas PGE2 and spontaneous ripening did not. These findings indicate that cervical ripening is related to significant local hormonal changes.<newchar><newabs>14525759<newchar>Human tissue factor pathway inhibitor-2 (TFPI-2) is a matrix-associated Kunitz inhibitor that inhibits the plasmin- and trypsin-mediated activation of zymogen matrix metalloproteinases involved in tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis. To directly assess its role in tumor growth and metastasis in vivo, we stably transfected HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells expressing either fully active wild-type human TFPI-2 (WT) or inactive R24Q TFPI-2 (QT) and examined their ability to form tumors and metastasize in athymic mice in comparison to mock-transfected cells (MT). MT and QT fibrosarcoma tumors grew 2 to 3 times larger than WT tumors. Tumor metastasis was confined to the lung and was observed in 75% of mice treated with either MT or QT cells, whereas only 42% of mice treated with WT cells developed lung metastases. Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses of each tumor group revealed 3- to 6-fold lower levels of murine vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression in WT tumors in relation to either MT or QT tumors. Comparative tumor gene expression analysis revealed that several human genes implicated in oncogenesis, invasion, metastasis, apoptosis, and angiogenesis had significantly altered levels of expression in WT tumors. Our collective data demonstrate that secretion of inhibitory TFPI-2 by a highly metastatic tumor cell markedly inhibits its growth and metastasis in vivo by regulating pericellular extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and angiogenesis.<newchar><newabs>15625312<newchar>Extracellular matrix (ECM)-degrading enzymes such as matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) play an essential role in the repair of infarcted tissue, which affects ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction. ADAMTS1 (A disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs), a newly discovered metalloprotease, was originally cloned from a cancer cell line, but little is known about its contribution to disease. To test the hypothesis that ADAMTS1 appears in infarcted myocardial tissue, we examined ADAMTS1 mRNA expression in a rat myocardial infarction model by Northern blotting, real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Normal endothelium expressed little ADAMTS1 mRNA, while normal myocardium expressed no detectable ADAMTS1 mRNA. Up-regulation of ADAMTS1 was demonstrated by Northern blot analysis and real-time RT-PCR at 3 h after coronary artery ligation. In situ hybridization revealed strong ADAMTS1 mRNA signals in the endothelium and myocardium in the infarcted heart, mainly in the infarct zone, at 3 h after myocardial infarction. The rapid and transient up-regulation of the ADAMTS1 gene in the ischemic heart was distinct from the regulatory patterns of other MMPs. Our study demonstrated that the ADAMTS1 gene is a new early immediate gene expressed in the ischemic endothelium and myocardium.<newchar><newabs>12839097<newchar>Oxalate is a major component of the most common form of kidney stones--calcium oxalate stones. High concentrations of oxalate promote stone formation in two ways: (1) by providing urinary conditions favorable to the formation of calcium oxalate crystals, and (2) by inducing renal injury that generates cellular debris and promotes crystal nucleation and attachment. Oxalate toxicity is mediated in part by activation of lipid signaling pathways that produce arachidonic acid, lysophospholipids, and ceramide. These lipids disrupt mitochondrial function by increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS), decreasing mitochondrial membrane potential, and increasing mitochondrial permeability. The net response is cytochrome C release, activation of caspases, and apoptosis or necrosis. Not all cells succumb to oxalate toxicity, however, in those cells that don't, ROS and lipid-signaling molecules induce changes in gene expression that allow them to survive and adapt to the toxic insult. The increased expression of immediate early genes (IEGs), osteopontin, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, crystallization inhibitors, and chemokines orchestrates a group of cellular responses--including cell proliferation, secretion of kidney stone inhibitory proteins, recruitment of immune cells, and tissue remodeling--that limit accumulation of cell debris or increase the production of inhibitors of calcium oxalate crystallization, thereby limiting stone formation.<newchar><newabs>11751256<newchar>Interaction between endometrial stromal cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) components has a crucial role in the development of endometriosis. Endometrial stromal cells attach to the mesothelial surface of peritoneum by means of integrins during their initial implantation and growth in endometriosis. Similarly, interaction between integrin and the extracellular matrix is also crucial for the remodeling of the endometrium during early pregnancy. We hypothesized that adhesion of endometrial stromal cells to the extracellular matrix could suppress the immunologic reaction to implanting endometrial cells by inducing the expression of Fas ligand (FasL), a mediator of the apoptotic pathway. Western blot analysis of human endometrial stromal cells plated onto fibronectin, laminin, and collagen IV revealed higher levels of FasL protein expression compared with endometrial stromal cells that plated to BSA-coated plates (control). Immunocytochemistry results from endometrial stromal cells plated to extracellular matrix proteins demonstrated a similar up-regulation of FasL expression. Eutopic endometrial stromal cells from women with endometriosis demonstrated higher FasL expression on control plates and those coated with extracellular matrix proteins compared with those from women without endometriosis. Disruption of actin cytoskeleton in endometrial stromal cells by treatment with cytochalasin D blocked the increase of FasL protein expression that occurred in response to adhesion to the extracellular matrix. These results suggest that attachment of endometrial stromal cells during retrograde menstruation to a new environment such as peritoneum with increased expression of laminin, fibronectin, and collagen IV could lead to an increase in FasL expression. Induction of FasL expression by adhesion of endometrial stromal cells to the extracellular matrix may take part in the development of a relative immunotolerance by inducing apoptosis of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which will allow further development of ectopic implants.<newchar><newabs>11748289<newchar>Expression of SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine; osteonectin, BM-40), an extracellular matrix (ECM) associated protein, is coincident with matrix remodeling. To further identify the functions of SPARC in vivo, we have made excisional wounds on the dorsa of SPARC-null and wild-type mice and monitored closure over time. A significant decrease in the size of the SPARC-null wounds, in comparison to that of wild-type, was observed at Day 4 and was maximal at Day 7. Although substantial differences in the percentage of proliferating cells were not apparent in SPARC-null relative to wild-type wounds, primary cultures of SPARC-null dermal fibroblasts displayed accelerated migration, relative to wild-type fibroblasts, in wound assays in vitro. Although the expression of collagen I mRNA in wounds, as measured by in situ hybridization (ISH), was not significantly different in SPARC-null vs wild-type mice, the collagen content of unwounded skin appeared to be substantially lower in the SPARC-null animals. By hydroxyproline analysis, the concentration of collagen in SPARC-null skin was found to be half that of wild-type skin. Moreover, we found an inverse correlation between the efficiency of collagen gel contraction by dermal fibroblasts and the concentration of collagen within the gel itself. We propose that the accelerated wound closure seen in SPARC-null dermis results from its decreased collagen content, a condition contributing to enhanced contractibility.<newchar><newabs>15062649<newchar>Although the overview above provides a partial molecular picture of the early stages of stepwise hepatocarcinogenesis. it should be emphasized that tumor and nontumor liver contain multiple changes, and that there is variability in their profile among different patients even within single studies. Variability in the number and types of genetic changes has also been observed geographically, and may be dependent upon the etiology of the tumor (viral, chemical or both). Interestingly, HBxAg inactivates tumor suppressors (such as p53 [by direct binding] and Rb [by stimulating its phosphorylation]) early in carcinogenesis that are mutated later during tumor progression. HBxAg also constitutively activates signal transduction pathways, such as those involving c-jun and ras, and activates oncogenes,such as c-nloc, that are otherwise activated by 3-catenin mutations. These findings suggest common molecular targets in hepatocarcinogenesis, despite different mechanisms of activation or inactivation. These observations need to be exploited in future drug discovery and in the development of new therapeutics. Heterogeneity in the mechanisms of tumor development, evidenced by the differences in the up- and down regulated genes reported in micro array analyses, as well as in the genetic loci that undergo mutation or LOH indifferent reports, has now been well documented. This suggests that there are multiple pathways to HCC, and that there is redundancy in the pathways that regulate cell growth and survival. These findings also reflect that,although hepatocarcinogenesis is multistep, the molecular changes that underpin histopathological changes in tumor development are likely to be different or only partially overlapping in individual tumors. Overall, the consequences of these changes suggest that the pathogenesis of HCC is accompanied by a progressive loss of differentiation, loss of normal cell adhesion, loss of the ECM, and constitutive activation of selected signal transduction pathways that promote cell growth and survival. Although mechanisms are important, attention also has to be paid to the target genes whose altered expression actually mediate the neoplastic phenotype. Other key avenues of work need to be explored. For example, it will be important to try to identify germline mutations in HBV-infected patients that are passed on to their children, resulting in the development of HCC in childhood. Clinical materials will also be important for the validation of new markers with diagnostic or prognostic potential. In this context, there is an urgent need to establish simple and low-cost tests based upon molecular changes that are hallmarks of HCC development. Identification of patients with early HCC will also significantly increase survival through its impact upon treatment. The discovery and validation of HCC markers may permit accurate staging of lesions, determine the proximity of such lesions to malignancy, and determine whether lesions with a particular genetic profile are still capable of remodeling through appropriate therapeutic intervention. The efficient reintroduction of the relevant tumor suppressors, or the inhibition of oncogene expression by siRNA, provide just some of the additional opportunities that will ultimately be useful in patient treatment. Together, these approaches will go far in reducing the very high morbidity and mortality associated with HCC.<newchar><newabs>11457723<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of proteolytic enzymes that degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM). The membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs) are a new family of MMPs that differ from other MMPs in that they have a transmembrane domain that anchors them to the cell surface. MT-MMPs have been shown to function as receptors and activators for other MMPs and to localize extracellular matrix proteolysis at the pericellular region. Here we report on mRNA and protein expression of the fifth human MT-MMP (MT5-MMP), a 64-kDa protein that is capable of converting pro-MMP-2 to its active form, in human kidney as well as its upregulation in diabetes. We also demonstrate upregulation of the active form of MMP-2 in kidney samples from patients with diabetes. Through immunohistochemistry, MT5-MMP expression was localized to the epithelial cells of the proximal and distal tubules, the collecting duct, and the loop of Henle. Furthermore, the tubular epithelial cells that expressed MT5-MMP were associated with tubular atrophy. Because renal tubular atrophy is a significant factor in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy and renal failure and the molecular mechanisms regulating this process remain unknown, it is hypothesized that the elevated expression of MT5-MMP contributes to the activation of pro-MMP-2, which participates in the remodeling of the proximal and distal tubules as well as in the collecting duct. These results provide the first evidence of the expression of a MT-MMP in diabetes and suggest a novel role for MT5-MMP in the pathogenesis of renal tubular atrophy and end-stage renal disease.<newchar><newabs>12124771<newchar>Recently, a view of the tumor as a functional tissue interconnected with the microenvironment has recently been described. For many years, the stroma has been studied in the context of the malignant lesion, and only rarely has its role been considered before carcinogenic lesions appear. Recent studies have provided evidence that stromal cells and their products can cause the transformation of adjacent cells through transient signaling that leads to the disruption of homeostatic regulation, including control of tissue architecture, adhesion, cell death, and proliferation. It is now well established that tumor progression requires a continually evolving network of interactions between neoplastic cells and extracellular matrix. A relevant step of this process is the remodeling of microenvironment which surrounds tumors leading to the release of ECM-associated growth factors which can then stimulate tumor and/or endothelial cells. Finally, tumor cells reorganizing the extracellular matrix to facilitate communications and escape the homeostatic control exerted by the microenvironment modify response to cytotoxic treatments.<newchar><newabs>11264666<newchar>The matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family, comprising more than 20 isoforms, modulates the extracellular milieu by degrading extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Because MMP is one of the few groups of proteinases capable of hydrolysing insoluble fibrillar proteins, they are likely to play crucial roles in regulating both normal and pathophysiological processes in the brain. However, little is yet known about their possible neuronal functions due presumably to their unusual redundancy and to the absence of a complete catalogue of isoforms. As an initial step in understanding the MMP system in the brain, we analysed an expression spectrum of MMP in rat brain using RT-PCR and discovered a novel brain-specific MMP, MT5-MMP. MT5-MMP was the predominant species among the nongelatinase-type isoforms in brain. MT5-MMP, present in all brain tissues examined, was most strongly expressed in cerebellum and was localized in the membranous structures of expressing neurons, as assessed biochemically and immunohistochemically. In cerebellum, its expression was regulated developmentally and was closely associated with dendritic tree formation of Purkinje cells, suggesting that MT5-MMP may contribute to neuronal development. Furthermore, its stable postdevelopmental expression and colocalization with senile plaques in Alzheimer brain indicates possible roles in neuronal remodeling naturally occurring in adulthood and in regulating pathophysiological processes associated with advanced age.<newchar><newabs>12586316<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play very important roles in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling during ovarian follicular development, ovulation and atresia. The aim of the present study was to determine the content of gelatinases in follicular fluid in various sized bovine follicles. Bovine ovaries were collected from local slaughterhouse and follicular fluid from follicles of 2 to over 25 mm in diameter was collected. Gelatinase activity within the follicular fluid was analyzed by gelatin zymography. The concentration of inhibin in the follicular fluid was also measured by immunoblot analysis. The proMMP-2 and alpha-subunit (alphaN) inhibin was detected in all follicles regardless of their size. The abundance of proMMP-2 varied with follicular size, while alphaN inhibin increased significantly (P&lt;0.01) in follicles of 10-14 and 15-20 mm in size. There was a positive and negative correlation between estradiol (E(2)) and progesterone (P(4)) concentrations with abundance of proMMP-2, respectively. Follicles of diameter over 25 mm had greater proMMP-9 activity than other follicles. These same follicles had significantly (P&lt;0.01) lower inhibin levels than follicles of 10-14 and 15-20 mm in size. In conclusion, these results suggest a significant role of these proteases in growth and development of bovine follicle, particularly proMMP-2 and active MMP-2 activities in the follicular fluid could serve as markers of follicular health while abundance of proMMP-9 may possibly denote a follicular cyst.<newchar><newabs>10190290<newchar>Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) degrade components of extracellular matrix (ECM), and thereby regulate formation, remodeling and maintenance of tissue. Abnormal function of cell surface proteases associated with malignant tumors may contribute directly to the invasive and malignant nature of the cells. Among the MMP's associated with the tumor cell surface, gelatinase A is believed to be particularly important, since it degrades type IV collagen, and is activated in a tumor specific manner, correlating with tumor spread and poor prognosis. Activation of pro-gelatinase A is uniquely regulated by a cell-mediated mechanism. This study describes an in vitro model that mimics the cell-surface activation mechanism. The expression of MT-MMP could not be detected in normal epithelial cells, but can be seen in transformed epithelial carcinoma cells.<newchar><newabs>11461752<newchar>Previous studies demonstrated that transition from compensatory pressure overload hypertrophy to decompensatory volume overload heart failure is associated with decreased cardiac tensile strength and activation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) in spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR). To test the hypothesis that in the absence of nitric oxide activation of MMP during cardiac failure causes disruption in the organization of extracellular matrix (ECM) and leads to decrease systolic and diastolic cardiac tensile strength, we employed SHR of 24--32 weeks, which demonstrates significant cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. The normotensive Wistar rats (NWR) were used as control. To determine whether cardiac hypertrophy is associated with increased elastinolytic matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity; quantitative elastin-zymography was performed on cardiac tissue homogenates. The MMP-2 activity was normalized by the levels of actin. The MMP-2/actin ratio was 2.0+/-0.5 in left ventricle (LV) and 1.5+/-0.25 in right ventricle (RV) of SHR(32wks); and 0.5+/-0.25 in LV and 0.25+/-0.12 in RV of NWR(32wks) (P&lt;0.02 when SHR compared with NWR). To measure passive diastolic cardiac function, rings from LV as well as RV through transmyocardial wall from male SHR and NWR of 6--8 weeks and 24--36 weeks were prepared. The LV wall thickness from endocardium to epicardium was 3.75+/-0.25 mm in SHR(32wks) as compared to 2.25+/-0.50 mm in NWR(32wks) (P&lt;0.01). The ring was placed in tissue myobath and length--tension relationships were assessed. The pressure--length relationship was shifted to left in SHR as compared to NWR. The amounts of cardiac elastin and collagen were determined spectrophotometrically by measuring desmosine--isodesmosine and hydroxyproline contents, respectively. A negative correlation between elastic tensile strength and elastin/collagen ratio was elucidated. To create situation analogous to heart failure and MMP activation, we treated cardiac rings with active MMP-2 and length--tension relation was measured. The relationship was shifted to right in both SHR and NWR when compared to their respective untreated groups. The results suggested that activation of MMP led to decreased cardiac tissue tensile strength and may cause systolic and diastolic dysfunction.<newchar><newabs>11393794<newchar>With the discoveries of different death mechanisms, an emerging definition of apoptosis is the process of cell death associated with caspase activation or caspase-mediated cell death. This definition accepts that caspases represent the final common mechanistic pathway in apoptosis. Apoptosis may be triggered either by activation events that target mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum or by activation of cell surface &quot;death receptors,&quot; for example, those in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily. In the postnatal and adult skeleton, apoptosis is integral to physiological bone turnover, repair, and regeneration. The balance of osteoblast proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis determines the size of the osteoblast population at any given time. Although apoptosis has been recorded in many studies of bone, the selective mechanisms invoked in the different models studied rarely have been identified. This review offers a broad overview of the current general concepts and controversies in apoptosis research and then considers specific examples of osteoblast apoptosis pertinent to skeletal development and to the regulation of bone turnover. In reviewing selected work on interdigital apoptosis in the developing skeleton, we discuss the putative roles of the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), Msx2, RAR-gamma, and death inducer obliterator 1 (DIO-1). In reviewing factors regulating apoptosis in the postnatal skeleton, we discuss roles of cytokines, growth factors, members of the TNF pathway, and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Finally, the paradoxical effects of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on osteoblast apoptosis in vivo are considered in the perspective of a recent hypothesis speculating that this may be a key mechanism to explain the anabolic effects of the hormone. An improved understanding of the apoptotic pathways and their functional outcomes in bone turnover and fracture healing may facilitate development of more targeted therapeutics to control bone balance in patients with osteoporosis and other skeletal diseases.<newchar><newabs>21829524<newchar>Adiponectin is an anti-atherogenic adipokine that inhibits the development of plaque by mechanisms that are not completely understood. Extracellular matrix (ECM) may have a role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. We explored the effect and mechanisms of adiponectin on the synthesis of prolyl-4-hydroxylase (P4H) in interleukin 6 (IL-6)-stimulated human aortic smooth muscle cells (HASMCs). P4Hα1 mRNA level was quantified by RT-PCR, the protein levels of phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and P4Hα1 were quantified by western blot analysis, and activation of specific protein 1 (Sp1) was determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and subcellular localization of Sp1 by immunofluorescence analysis. Adiponectin significantly increased P4Hα1 mRNA and protein levels in IL-6-stimulated HASMCs in a dose- and time-dependent manner. As well, ERK1/2 and Sp1 played a crucial role in the effect of adiponectin upregulating P4Hα1 expression in IL-6-stimulated HASMCs. Adiponectin abrogated the effects of IL-6 on collagen III level, which may indicate that P4Hα1 is essential for folding the procollagen polypeptide chains into stabilized collagen. Adiponectin attenuates IL-6-inhibited P4Hα1 synthesis and stabilizes collagen formation in HASMCs through a Sp1-ERK1/2-P4Hα1-dependent pathway.<newchar><newabs>12620642<newchar>In multiple sclerosis (MS), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in tissues is the result of a balance between MMPs and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs). MMP-9 predominates in acute MS lesions and is inhibited by TIMP-1, while MMP-2 may participate in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) such as in chronic disease and is inhibited by TIMP-2. These differences may be reflected in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). We have tried to characterize MMP-2 and MMP-9 activities, in relation to their respective TIMPs, 2 and 1, as a factor of different types of the disease, as this information was not previously clearly stated. We found the MMP-2/TIMP-2 ratio in serum to show higher values in secondary progressive (SP, p=0.02) and primary progressive (PP, p=0.01) MS than short disease duration (SDD) relapsing-remitting (RR) MS, but not different from the healthy control (HC) group. Whereas the MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio in serum showed higher (p=0.04) values in SDD RR MS than PP but also in active patients, evaluated either clinically (p=0.006) or from the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, p&lt;0.05), compared to inactive disease. CSF MMP to TIMP ratios did not differ between MS subtypes, suggesting systemic rather CNS-restricted changes. These results show that an increase in MMP-2/TIMP-2 ratio marks chronic progression in MS, but it is as high as in HC, and also confirm that high MMP-9 activity characterizes short duration relapsing and active forms of the disease.<newchar><newabs>16691565<newchar>The proteoglycan versican is essential to the formation of endocardial cushion mesenchyme by epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). A potentially important factor in the regulation of versican activity during cushion EMT is proteolysis by ADAMTS metalloproteinases. Using antibodies to the DPEAAE neoepitope created by ADAMTS proteolysis of versican, we detected the amino terminal 70-kDa versican cleavage fragment in cardiac cushions. Initially (i.e., 9.5 days post coitum [dpc]), the fragment is associated with endocardial cells undergoing EMT and with newly derived mesenchymal cells. ADAMTS-1 and its cofactor fibulin-1 were also associated with these cells. As cushions become increasingly populated with mesenchymal cells (10.5-12.5 dpc), the fragment remains asymmetrically distributed compared with the pattern of total versican. Highest levels of the fragment are present in regions immediately subjacent to the endocardium characterized as having densely packed, rounded cells, lacking cellular protrusions. With further development (i.e., 12.5-14.5 dpc), the pattern of fragment distribution within cushions broadens to include the ECM surrounding loosely packed mesenchymal cells in the cushion core. Together, the findings reveal that versican proteolysis leading to the production of the 70-kDa fragment is integral to the formation and differentiation of endocardial cushion mesenchyme.<newchar><newabs>10986582<newchar>The heart has a three-dimensional extracellular fibrillar collagen scaffolding that normally serves a variety of functions important to tissue integrity and efficiency of muscular systolic pump and diastolic suction pump function (see article by Kovács). An adverse accumulation of extracellular matrix structural protein compromises tissue stiffness and adversely affects myocardial viscoelasticity, this leads to ventricular diastolic and systolic dysfunction. Hormonal factors, such as chronic, inappropriate (relative to dietary salt intake and intravascular volume) elevations in circulating angiotensin II and aldosterone, are accompanied by fibrosis of right and left sides of the heart. Hemodynamic factors regulate cardiac myocyte work and their adaptive hypertrophic growth. The relative contributions of hormonal and hemodynamic factors in regulating growth of muscular and nonmuscular compartments must form the basis for the selection of pharmacologic intervention that will optimize the management of symptomatic heart failure that accompanies hypertensive heart disease and ischemic cardiomyopathy. Cardioprotective strategies that prevent alteration of normal cardiac tissue structure by fibrosis and appearance of abnormal ventricular stiffness (viscoelasticity) are based on negating the generation of these hormones or interfering with their receptor-ligand binding. A regression of established cardiac fibrosis and improvement in abnormal ventricular stiffness is feasible. Experimental and clinical findings with lisinopril in hypertensive heart disease, where cardiac fibrosis and abnormal ventricular stiffness are present, indicate that such cardioreparation should be a targeted objective of pharmacologic intervention. Systematic analysis of this approach using a controlled clinical trial format is warranted. In recognizing the importance of viscoelastic elements in regulating the mechanical behavior of cardiac tissue, and in turn systolic and diastolic ventricular function, a broader tissue compartment based paradigm (ECM versus myocyte) for the management of heart failure emerges.<newchar><newabs>16167086<newchar>MMPs, which degrade components of the ECM, have roles in embryonic development, tissue repair, cancer, arthritis, and cardiovascular disease. We show that a missense mutation of MMP13 causes the Missouri type of human spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD(MO)), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by defective growth and modeling of vertebrae and long bones. Genome-wide linkage analysis mapped SEMD(MO) to a 17-cM region on chromosome 11q14.3-23.2 that contains a cluster of 9 MMP genes. Among these, MMP13 represented the best candidate for SEMD(MO), since it preferentially degrades collagen type II, abnormalities of which cause skeletal dysplasias that include Strudwick type SEMD. DNA sequence analysis revealed a missense mutation, F56S, that substituted an evolutionarily conserved phenylalanine residue for a serine in the proregion domain of MMP13. We predicted, by modeling MMP13 structure, that this F56S mutation would result in a hydrophobic cavity with misfolding, autoactivation, and degradation of mutant protein intracellularly. Expression of wild-type and mutant MMP13s in human embryonic kidney cells confirmed abnormal intracellular autoactivation and autodegradation of F56S MMP13 such that only enzymatically inactive, small fragments were secreted. Thus, the F56S mutation results in deficiency of MMP13, which leads to the human skeletal developmental anomaly of SEMD(MO).<newchar><newabs>20226762<newchar>Oxidative stress has been shown to play an important role in the development of hypertensive renal injury. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors alpha (PPARalpha) has antioxidant effect. In this study, we demonstrated that fenofibrate significantly reduced proteinuria, inflammatory cell recruitment and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins deposition in the kidney of SHRs without apparent effect on blood pressure. To investigate the mechanisms involved, we found that fenofibrate treatment markedly reduced oxidative stress accompanied by reduced activity of renal NAD(P)H oxidase, increased activity of Cu/Zn SOD, and decreased phosphorylation of p38MAPK and JNK in the kidney of SHRs. Taken together, fenofibrate treatment can protect against hypertensive renal injury without affecting blood pressure by inhibiting inflammation and fibrosis via suppression of oxidative stress and MAPK activity.<newchar><newabs>18707640<newchar>Within the last few years, it has become evident that the beneficial effect of cell transplantation on ventricular function and myocardial perfusion is in large part mediated through paracrine effects on the host myocardium. Studies in which medium conditioned by cultured cells, usually mesenchymal stem cells, were injected into infarcted animal hearts have provided definitive evidence of this mechanism of action. Paracrine effects of the donor cells include but are not limited to angiogenesis, mobilization of both circulating and bone-marrow-derived stem cells, activation of cardiac-resident stem cells (CRSCs), and stabilization of the extracellular matrix (ECM). These paracrine effects can be augmented by transplantation of cells modified to express therapeutically useful transgenes, or by preconditioning through hypoxic or pharmacologic means. Strategies to enhance the paracrine effects of cell transplantation may thus be employed in the next generation of cell therapies, with greater functional benefit.<newchar><newabs>18463228<newchar>The mammalian growth plate is a dynamic structure rich in extracellular matrix (ECM). Interactions of growth plate chondrocytes with ECM proteins regulate cell behavior. In this study, we compared chondrocyte adhesion and spreading dynamics on fibronectin (FN) and bone sialoprotein (BSP). Chondrocyte adhesion and spreading were also compared with fibroblasts to analyze potential cell-type-specific effects. Chondrocyte adhesion to BSP is independent of posttranslational modifications but is dependent on the RGD sequence in BSP. Whereas chondrocytes and fibroblasts adhered at similar levels on FN and BSP, cells displayed more actin-dependent spread on FN despite a 16x molar excess of BSP adsorbed to plastic. To identify intracellular mediators responsible for this difference in spreading, we investigated focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-Src and Rho-Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling. Although activated FAK localized to the vertices of adhered chondrocytes, levels of FAK activation did not correlate with the extent of spreading. Furthermore, Src inhibition reduced chondrocyte spreading on both FN and BSP, suggesting that FAK-Src signaling is not responsible for less cell spreading on BSP. In contrast, inhibition of Rho and ROCK in chondrocytes increased cell spreading on BSP and membrane protrusiveness on FN but did not affect cell adhesion. In fibroblasts, Rho inhibition increased fibroblast spreading on BSP while ROCK inhibition changed membrane protrusiveness of FN and BSP. In summary, we identify a novel role for Rho-ROCK signaling in regulating chondrocyte spreading and demonstrate both cell- and matrix molecule-specific mechanisms controlling cell spreading.<newchar><newabs>17130294<newchar>The CCN family is a group of six secreted proteins that specifically associate with the extracellular matrix. Structurally, CCN proteins are modular, containing up to four distinct functional domains. CCN family members are induced by growth factors and cytokines such as TGFbeta and endothelin 1 and cellular stress such as hypoxia, and are overexpressed in pathological conditions that affect connective tissues, including scarring, fibrosis and cancer. Although CCN family members were discovered over a decade ago, the precise biological role, mechanism of action and physiological function of these proteins has remained elusive until recently, when several key mechanistic insights into the CCN family emerged. The CCNs have been shown to have key roles as matricellular proteins, serving as adaptor molecules connecting the cell surface and extracellular matrix (ECM). Although they appear not to have specific high-affinity receptors, they signal through integrins and proteoglycans. Furthermore, in addition to having inherent adhesive abilities that modulate focal adhesions and control cell attachment and migration, they execute their functions by modulating the activity of a variety of different growth factors, such as TGFbeta. CCN proteins not only regulate crucial biological processes including cell differentiation, proliferation, adhesion, migration, apoptosis, ECM production, chondrogenesis and angiogenesis, but also have more sinister roles promoting conditions such as fibrogenesis.<newchar><newabs>17492773<newchar>Chondrocyte differentiation is a multi-step process characterized by successive changes in cell morphology and gene expression. In addition to tight regulation by numerous soluble factors, these processes are controlled by adhesive events. During the early phase of the chondrocyte life cycle, cell-cell adhesion through molecules such as N-cadherin and neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) is required for differentiation of mesenchymal precursor cells to chondrocytes. At later stages, for example in growth plate chondrocytes, adhesion signaling from extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins through integrins and other ECM receptors such as the discoidin domain receptor (DDR) 2 (a collagen receptor) and Annexin V is necessary for normal chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy. Cell-matrix interactions are also important for chondrogenesis, for example through the activity of CD44, a receptor for Hyaluronan and collagens. The roles of several signaling molecules involved in adhesive signaling, such as integrin-linked kinase (ILK) and Rho GTPases, during chondrocyte differentiation are beginning to be understood, and the actin cytoskeleton has been identified as a common target of these adhesive pathways. Complete elucidation of the pathways connecting adhesion receptors to downstream effectors and the mechanisms integrating adhesion signaling with growth factor- and hormone-induced pathways is required for a better understanding of physiological and pathological skeletal development.<newchar><newabs>18827016<newchar>Cutaneous wound repair requires the de novo induction of a specialized form of fibroblast, the alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA)-expressing myofibroblast, which migrates into the wound where it adheres to and contracts extracellular matrix (ECM), resulting in wound closure. Persistence of the myofibroblast results in scarring and fibrotic disease. In this report, we show that, compared with wild-type littermates, PKCepsilon-/- mice display delayed impaired cutaneous wound closure and a reduction in myofibroblasts. Moreover, both in the presence and absence of TGFbeta, dermal fibroblasts from PKCepsilon-/- mice cultured on fibronectin show impaired abilities to form ;supermature' focal adhesions and alpha-SMA stress fibers, and reduced pro-fibrotic gene expression. Smad3 phosphorylation in response to TGFbeta1 was impaired in PKCepsilon-/- fibroblasts. PKCepsilon-/- fibroblasts show reduced FAK and Rac activation, and adhesive, contractile and migratory abilities. Overexpressing constitutively active Rac1 rescues the defective FAK phosphorylation, cell migration, adhesion and stress fiber formation of these PKCepsilon-/- fibroblasts, indicating that Rac1 operates downstream of PKCepsilon, yet upstream of FAK. These results suggest that loss of PKCepsilon severely impairs myofibroblast formation and function, and that targeting PKCepsilon may be beneficial in selectively modulating wound healing and fibrotic responses in vivo.<newchar><newabs>10640677<newchar>Type 1B astrocytes of the human optic nerve head (ONH) constitutively express neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) in vivo and in vitro. Increased synthesis of NCAM has been detected in reactive astrocytes in the glaucomatous ONH of human donor eyes. Several NCAM isoforms are generated through alternate RNA splicing in tissue- and disease-specific patterns. In this study, we analyzed expression of NCAM isoforms in ONH of normal donors at different ages and in glaucoma. Total RNA was extracted from ONH of fetal, normal adult and glaucomatous eyes, and cultured human ONH astrocytes, fetal brain astrocytes and an astrocytoma cell line, for reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. To distinguish between NCAM 180 and 140 isoforms, exon-specific primer sets covering exons 13-19 were used. Isoform-specific riboprobes were used for in situ hybridization (ISH) in glaucomatous and in age-matched ONH. By RT-PCR, NCAM 140 was the predominant isoform in adult ONH as well as in all cultured cells. NCAM 180 mRNA was strongly expressed in glaucoma, whereas in normal adult tissues it was not detectable. ISH confirmed expression of NCAM in normal adult ONH and localized NCAM 140 mRNA to astrocytes. ISH demonstrated expression of NCAM 180 mRNA in reactive astrocytes in glaucomatous ONH. Our results demonstrate that the NCAM 180 isoform is induced in glaucoma. NCAM 180 may play a role in astrocyte interaction with extracellular matrix (ECM), vessels, axons and other astrocytes and, through its expanded cytoplasmic domain, serve as a signaling molecule for reactive astrocytes during remodeling of the ONH in glaucoma.<newchar><newabs>10988146<newchar>Persistent asthma is associated with airway inflammation, tissue damage, and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, which may be mediated, in part, through release of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1). To investigate the role of allergen in the induction of MMP-9 and TIMP-1, bronchoscopy and segmental bronchoprovocation (SBP) with saline (SAL) and antigen (AG) were performed in 17 allergic subjects. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was done 5 min and 48 h after challenge and concentrations of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 in BAL fluid (BALF) were measured by ELISA. Forty-eight hours after AG challenge, concentrations of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 were increased in the airway, but not in serum. Zymography demonstrated that MMP-9 was the predominant metalloproteinase and was present in a latent proform. MMP-9 immunoreactivity was associated primarily with neutrophils, and concentrations of MMP-9 in BALF correlated with airway neutrophils and, to a lesser extent, with alveolar macrophages. These data suggest that AG challenge leads to generation of factors, including MMP-9, that may be associated with the initiation of bronchial injury, which may then lead to remodeling in asthma.<newchar><newabs>